






























Satish Chandra - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Satish Chandra


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Satish Chandra
1917 - 1990




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Satish Chandra was born on 27th January 1917 in Bareilly. He completed his B.SC in Agriculture from the Government Agriculture College in Kanpur and obtained an MA in Economics from Bareilly College. After his education, Chandra began his career as a businessman.
He joined the Indian National Congress in 1935 and thereafter became a member of the All India Congress Committee and the United Provinces Congress Committee. He was also associated with the Congress Socialist Party until 1945, where he actively participated in trade union and Dalit welfare activities.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Chandra’s involvement in various freedom struggle movements got him imprisoned thrice.
Contribution to Constitution Making
He was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces constituency on a Congress ticket.
Later Contributions
Chandra was very active in politics post-independence, beginning with him founding the Indian Youth Congress in 1949. From 1949 until 1952, he was chosen as a member of various national committees for foodgrains, railways, and scientific research. He was also on the Board of Trustees for several educational and medical institutions.
His first official political position was as the Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister in 1951. After this, he was elected to represent Bareilly in the Lok Sabha on two terms (in 1952 and 1971). Chandra also held the position of deputy minister for defence (1952-55), production (1955-57), and commerce and industry (1957-62).
After resigning from the deputy minister role, Chandra took an active interest in the business. From 1962 to 1965, he occupied the position of chairman in the BIC Group of Industries and the Indian Airlines Corporation. He continued to have an active role in Indian politics, part of several delegations to foreign countries for machine tools, trade, fertilizer, and airlines.


 



Key Speeches


During the discussion on Supreme Court judges, he argued in favour of removing the age limit of 65 years.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















