






























Ujjal Singh - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Ujjal Singh


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Ujjal Singh
1895 - 1983




Key Information

Party: Akali Dal
Constituency: East Punjab
Religion: Sikh
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Punjabi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Minorities+1 moreProvincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Ujjal Singh was born on 27th December, 1895 in the Hadal village belonging to the Shahpur district. He pursued his M.A in history from Government College, Lahore in the year 1916.
From 1926-36, he served as an elected member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly for two terms between the years 1926-1936.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Singh served as the Parliamentary Secretary for the Home department during the period of 1936-41, but resigned from this post during the Quit India Movement.
He, along with other prominent Sikh leaders, represented the Sikh community at the Second Round Table Conference, as well as at the Cripps Mission in 1942.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Singh was elected from East Punjab on an Akali party ticket. He participated in the deliberations on the Objectives Resolution.
Later Contributions
Post independence, Singh was a member of the legislative council of East Punjab and held several important portfolios, such as Minister for Industries and Civil Supplies, and Finance and Industries.
He served as the Governor of Punjab from 1st September 1965- 26th June 1966, and as the acting governor for the state of Tamil Nadu between 28th June to 16th June 1967.
Singh died in the year 1983.


 



Key Speeches


Singh argued in favour of the adoption of the Objective resolution which laid down the founding principles of the Constitution.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















