






























B.N. Munavalli - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										B.N. Munavalli


 



Constituent Assembly Members
B.N. Munavalli
1904 - 




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay States
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Marathi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Basavaneppa N. Munavalli was born on 19 August 1904 in Ramdurg State, a Maratha Princely State that was part of the Deccan State Agency (presently in the Belgaum district of Karnataka). He completed his schooling in Dharwar. Later, he pursued a B.A. and an LL.B degree from the Karnatak College in Dharwar and the Poona Law College. Soon after, he began his legal practice in Hubli.  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Munavalli was part of several citizen-led movements and organisations in Ramdurg. He was the secretary of Hubli’s Textile Labour Union (1932) and President of its Citizens’ League (1934). As a member of the Hubli Municipal Borough, he also held legislative office. He was the Chairman of Hubli’s High School Committee and Compulsory Education Committee (1945). 
He also featured prominently in the freedom movement and the fight for a better government within Ramdurg State. The people of Ramdurg were suffering because of the massive increase in land revenues collected by the State authorities, as compared to those collected in the British provinces. Their plight was compounded by the fact that most administrators were Marathi-speaking non-natives brought in from other parts of Maharashtra. The frustration of the people soon found an outlet through the founding of the Ramdurg Samsthan Prajasangha on 13 May 1938, of which Munavalli was the President.  
Munavalli, an influential advocate by then, also represented the demands of the people of Ramdurg in other public forums such as the Deccan States’ Peoples Conference. Here, a committee of 6 Congress leaders was formed to evaluate the situation in Ramdurg. After negotiating with the Raja, a Land Revenue Assessment Committee was formed of which Munavalli was a member. But he was not satisfied by the functioning of this committee and its recommendations, and the Prajasangha decided to continue with their agitation. 
In April 1939, he was arrested alongside other leaders of the Prajasangha for protesting against the oppressive tactics of the State. Many people gathered the next day to free the political prisoners, but the situation turned violent, leading to the death of many people including police and jail staff. Again in 1942, Munavalli would spend a year in jail for similar reasons.  
Contribution to Constitution Making
Munavalli was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Deccan States on a Congress ticket. He did not make any significant interventions in the Assembly.  
Later Contributions
Munavalli was a member of the Provisional Parliament up till 1952. He participated in the Karnataka unification movement under the platform of the Akhand Karnatak Rajya Nirman Parishad. In the 1957 elections, he contested for the Lok Sabha seat from Dharwar North constituency, losing out to the Congress candidate. 


 



Resources



Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India) 
Mahatma Gandhi’s Perception of the Nature of the Ramadurga Revolt: A Re-examination by Ashk Shettar and A.B. Vaggar (Indian History Congress, 2011) 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















