






























Historical Constitutions - Constitution of India



























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 





Home
								 ≫ 
										Historical Constitutions


 


Historical Constitutions



The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the Constituent Assembly from 1946-1950. However, this Constitution drew on a longer history of antecedents documents drafted either as legislation governing British India or aspirational political documents. This section of the website presents carefully selected, edited and human tagged versions of these ‘historical constitutions.’


 





A Scheme of Political Safeguards for the Protection of the Depressed Classes in the Future Constitution of a Self-Governing India - A Memorandum by Dr. Ambedkar and Rao Bahadur R. Srinivasan (1930)









The Constitution of the Hindusthan Free State Act, 1944









Communal Deadlock and A Way to Solve It (B.R Ambedkar, 1945)









Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir (1957)









The Government of Mysore Act 1940









The Government of Mysore Act 1923









Aundh State Constitution Act 1939









Karachi Resolution 1931 (Indian National Congress)









The Constitution of India Bill (Unknown, 1895)



 





Indian Councils Act, 1909



 





The Congress-League Scheme 1916 (INC & AIML)



 





Government of India Act, 1919



 





The Revolutionary (Hindustan Socialist Republican Association, 1925)



 





The Commonwealth of India Bill (National Convention, India, 1925)



 





Nehru Report (Motilal Nehru,1928)



 





Irwin Declaration (Lord Irwin, 1929)



 





Declaration of Purna Swaraj (Indian National Congress, 1930)



 





Karachi Resolution 1931 (Jawaharlal Nehru)



 





Karachi Resolution 1931 (Mahatma Gandhi)



 





Poona Pact 1932 (B.R Ambedkar and M.K Gandhi)



 





Government of India Act 1935



 





Constitution of Free India : A Draft (M.N. Roy, 1944)



 





Political Demands of Scheduled Castes 1944 (SCF)



 B.R Ambedkar, the founder of the All India Scheduled Castes Federation (SCF), appended this document to his 1945 book 'What the Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables'. The document comprises a series of resolutions passed by the SCF's Working Committee that demanded constitutional protections for Schedules Caste community.





Sapru Committee Report (Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, 1945)



 





States and Minorities (B.R. Ambedkar, 1947)



 B.R. Ambedkar drafted and submitted this seminal document to the Constituent Assembly's Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights on the request of the All India Scheduled Castes Federation. It presents his constitutional vision for India, with a particular emphasis on safeguards for minorities.





Draft of Indian Woman's Charter of Rights And Duties (All India Women's Conference, 1946)



 





Gandhian Constitution for Free India (Shriman Narayan Agarwal, 1946)



 





Preliminary Notes on Fundamental Rights 1946 (B.N. Rau)



 





Cabinet Mission Plan (Cabinet Mission, 1946)



 





Outline of a New Constitution (B.N. Rau, 1946)



 





Indian Independence Act 1947 (UK Parliament)



 





Manipur State Constitution Act, 1947



 





Draft Constitution of the Republic of India (Socialist Party, 1948)



 















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















