






























Chaudhari Hyder Husein - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Chaudhari Hyder Husein


 



Constituent Assembly Members
Chaudhari Hyder Husein
1890 - 




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Chaudhari Hyder Husein was born at Bhilwal in Barabanki district of Uttar Pradesh on 24 December 1890. He completed his schooling from Church Mission High School, Lucknow. He was highly educated and studied at various colleges including M.A.O. College, Aligarh; Oxford University and Trinity College, Dublin.
He received an M.A. in art followed by a law degree. He studied at Lincoln’s Inn and was called to be a barrister in London. Later, he moved back to India, enrolled himself at the Allahabad High Court. From a video, about a house that Husein built, we know that he trained under Mirza Sami Ullah Beg Saheb and A.P. Sen. Husein, set up his practise in Lucknow and went on to become a Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court of India.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Not much is known about Husein’s involvement in the freedom struggle except that he was a member of the U.P. Legislative Assembly in 1937.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Husein was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces through a Congress Party ticket. He did not actively participate in the Assembly debates. Husein made only one speech.
Contributions Post-Independence
Husein was elected as a member of the Provincial Parliament of Indian and later the Lok Sabha (1952-1957). He was a part of the Parliamentary delegation to Russia when he was a member of the First Lok Sabha.
In the 1957 Lok Sabha elections, Husein lost to Atal Bihari Vajpayee. He then left active politics for a career in civil society that included the Indian Council of World Affairs, the Social Service League and the Samaj Sewa Sangh, Lucknow. He contributed to various charitable and educational institutions and founded the Rotary Club, Lucknow.
Husein spent his time of leisure in agriculture related activities.
Key Writings
Husein published various articles that included ‘A unified Code for India’, ‘The Hindu Code’, ‘The Avadh Bar’, ‘Kashmir’ and ‘Lessons from the General Elections of 1951’.


 



Key Speeches



In his only speech in the Assembly, at the far end of constitution-making, Husein observed that the Constitution was flexible and compatible with a range of political ideologies.



 



Resources



Who’s Who, Lok Sabha Publication (1952)
Evan – e – Hydar : Chaudhry Hyder Hussain Home – Magnificent Indian architecture from the 1930’s, Metaphor LitFest, YouTube



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















