






























Bakshi Tek Chand - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Bakshi Tek Chand


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Bakshi Tek Chand
1883 - 




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: East Punjab
Religion: Sikh
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Punjabi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Committee on the Rules of ProcedureAdvisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas+1 moreSub-Committee on Minorities 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Bakshi Tek Chand was born on 26 August 1883 in Nurpur, Kangra district, situated in present day Himachal Pradesh. His schooling was spread across the Municipal Board School, Nurpur, Mission School, Dharamsala, and D.A.V High School, Lahore. He did his LL.B at University Law College Lahore. Soon after, he began legal practice at the Lahore High Court. He would end up becoming a Judge and Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Chand’s association with the Congress began in the early 1900s. In 1919, he was appointed as the Secretary of the Punjab Pradesh Congress Committee for a one-year term. Half a decade later, he entered the Punjab Legislative Council for the first time.
He had little to no role in the various Congress movements like Satyagraha and Civil Disobedience Movements. This is not a surprise as he was a High Court Judge for most of his career. His political career was rather limited: unlike many other Constituent Assembly members, he was not what you would consider a full-fledged Congressman.
Chand played a key role in public life during partition. He assisted the famous jurist MC Setalvad in presenting the Congress’ position on how Punjab should be split between India and Pakistan. When partition and its accompanying violence and refugee crisis was underway, Chand was appointed to the 1947 Punjab Riot Sufferers Relief Committee to deal with the situation.
Many important health and educational institutions had Chand on their boards. Some of the positions he held included: Secretary and President, D.A.V. College, President, Punjab Medical Education and Relief Society, Trustee, Naraindass Moolchand Hospital for Children and Chairman, Punjab Engineering Education and Research Society.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Chand was elected from East Punjab on a Congress Party ticket. He actively participated in the Constituent Assembly Debates and on some occasions his amendments and proposals were accepted by the Assembly. He spoke on issues relating to personal liberty, preventive detention and the separation of powers and more.
Later Contributions:
In 1949 Bakshi Tek Chand was appointed as the Chairman of the newly constituted Patents Enquiry Committee set up by the Government of India. This Committee aimed to examine India’s existing patent system and reform it. The Committee produced its landmark report in 1950.


 



Key Speeches



In an impassioned speech, Chand supported Ambedkar’s proposal to add a provision in the Constitution that directed the State to ‘take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State’. He reminded the Assembly that such a proposal had been on the agenda of the Congress Party for decades. He felt that the provision ensured the ‘free administration of justice’.
He proposed an amendment that allowed Parliament to pass laws that empowered the Supreme Court to issue Writs that went beyond those mentioned in the Draft Constitution.
He was an ardent critic of the Draft Constitution’s preventive detention provisions and proposed various safeguards which were accepted by the Assembly.



 



Resources



Founding Fathers (The Tribune, 2000)
Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India)

 


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















