






























Workers' Rights in M.N. Roy's Constitution of Free India : A Draft (1944) - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Workers’ Rights in M.N. Roy’s Constitution of Free India : A Draft (1944)


 
















Workers’ Rights in M.N. Roy’s Constitution of Free India : A Draft (1944)



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






02 May 2022

Share









 
									Image credit: Wikimedia Commons								

On 1 May, the world celebrated ‘May Day’ or ‘International Workers’ Day to commemorate the gains of the workers’ movements across the world. The fruits of this movement have led to the legal and constitutional codification of workers’ rights in many countries. The Indian Constitution, through Articles 41, 42, 43 and 43A provides a number of protections and welfare measures for Indian workers. Before the Constitution was enacted, a number of Historical Constitutions contained similar provisions. In this post, we look at one such Historical Constitution: Constitution of Free India: A Draft (1944).
The Draft was prepared by M.N. Roy, an Indian ‘revolutionary’ who played a key role in the communist movement in India. In a section titled ‘The Declaration of Rights and Fundamental Principles’, Roy lay down the rights of Indians which included those related to workers:
(m) An irreducible standard of living for all laboring in fields, factories, mines, transport, offices, and schools shall be guaranteed by minimum wages fixed by law.
(n) Adequately remunerative employment or relief is a right of citizenship.
(o) Nobody shall labour for more than eight hours a day, for six days a week, and every worker shall be entitled to one month’s leave with full pay every year, and women workers to three months maternity leave with full pay.
(t)the right of association for the purpose of safeguarding and amelioration of economic conditions and the political status of workers, employees, and peasants shall be guaranteed.
Calcutta Tram Way Workers’ Union Strike in 1945 for Better Working Conditions. Image Credits: Wikimedia Commons
Why does the Draft emphasize that remunerative employment is a ‘right of citizenship’ – wouldn’t it be sufficient to just say workers have a right to remunerative employment? For Roy, remunerative employment – the cornerstone of workers’ rights – must be viewed as fundamental to citizenship in the same way that rights to free speech and equality are seen as inextricably linked to citizenship. This is a novel articulation of workers’ rights that is absent in other Historical Constitutions.
Another provision of Roy’s Draft is the inclusion of a worker’s right to association. Roy’s emphasis that this right is not restricted to protecting the economic status but also the ‘political status of workers’ is unique. Roy’s Constitution explicitly recognizes workers as a distinct political interest group who, in addition to the regular political rights of voting and standing for elections, also have the right to politically mobilize against private employers or the State or any engage in any other political activity.
These two features of Roy’s constitutional protections for workers make the Draft rather novel from the workers’ rights found in other Historical Constitutions like the Nehru Report 1928 and the Karachi Resolution 1931. The Draft indicates the centrality of workers’ rights in Roy’s constitutional vision drawing from his wide political work in the Indian labour and communist movements.

Tags Historical ConstitutionMN RoyWorkers' Rights 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















