






























Sarat Chandra Bose - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Sarat Chandra Bose


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Sarat Chandra Bose
1889 - 1950




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: 
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Committee on the Rules of Procedure 



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Sarat Chandra Bose was born on 6th September 1889 in Cuttack, Odisha. He got his MA from Presidency College, Kolkata in 1909 and became a legal practitioner in 1911. He was enrolled in the Honourable Society of Lincoln Inn’s Society and practiced as a Barrister in England from 1912-1914.
He was a member of the Bengal Legislative Council and was a part of the Indian National Congress. Bose was also elected as an Alderman multiple times in the Calcutta Corporation.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Bose left his professional practice to join the Civil Disobedience Movement in 1930. He supported and bankrolled the revolutionaries in Bangalore. He was arrested in 1932 for three years due to his involvement in the Civil Disobedience Movement.
Bose was involved with parties having socialist alignment such as the Forward Bloc, founded by his brother Subash Chandra Bose. He was placed under house arrest on 11th December 1941, over British suspicion that he was colluding with Japanese forces. He was under such arrest for four years.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Bose was elected to the Assembly from Bengal, through a Congress ticket. However, his term in the Constituent Assembly was short-lived due to his disagreement with the Congress on partition of Bengal and Punjab.
Later Contributions:
Bose vehemently opposed the partition of Bengal and Punjab over religious lines and resigned from the Congress Working Committee on 6th January 1947. He started a protest campaign against Mountbatten Plan in February 1947 and strived for the formation of a United Independent Bengal.
He envisaged India to become a Socialist Republic and published newspapers such as The Socialist Republican, Mahajati, and The Nation to voice his opinions. He even formed the Socialist Republican Party in August 1947.
He died in Kolkata on 20th February 1950.
Key Writings:
Bose’s writings have been compiled in the following works: Selected Speeches and Writings of Sarat Chandra Bose (1947-50) by Sarat Chandra Bose, Published by Sarat Bose Academy; The Glory of Bondage: Sarat Chandra Bose’s Letters to Daughter Gita (1942-45) by Sarat Chandra Bose and Gita Biswas; I Warned My Countrymen by Sarat Chandra Bose, Sisir Kumar Bose and; The Voice of Sarat Chandra Bose Selected Speeches (1927-41) by Sarat Chandra Bose, Sisir Kumar Bose, Suman Chattopadhyay.


 



Resources



Sarat Chandra Bose: Remembering My Father by Sisir Kumar Bose.
Brothers Against the Raj: A Biography of Indian Nationalists Sarat and Subhas Chandra Bose by Leonard A Gordon.
Subhas and Sarat: An Intimate Memoir of the Bose Brothers by Sisir Kumar Bose.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















