






























G. V. Mavalankar - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										G. V. Mavalankar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
G. V. Mavalankar
1888 - 1956




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Gujarati
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Ganesh Vasudev Mavalankar, popularly known as Dadasaheb, was born on 27th November, 1888 in Baroda (now Vadodara). He obtained his B.A. in Science from the Gujarat College in Ahmedabad. He completed his law degree in 1912.
Mavalankar established himself as a prominent lawyer and was an active social worker. He was selected by the Congress party for the Presidentship of the Sixth Central Legislative Assembly in January 1946.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Mavalankar played an active role in the freedom movement in Gujarat. He was associated with various national leaders like Sardar Vallabhai Patel, Mahatma Gandhi as well as a various social organisations in Gujarat.
Mavalankar became associated with the Indian National Congress after he joined the Non-Cooperation movement under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi. He was appointed as the Secretary of the Gujarat Provincial Congress Committee during 1921-22 due to his contributions to the movement.
Mavalankar played a vital and active role in the ‘Khaira No-Rent’ campaign. He was actively involved in famine and flood relief works.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Mavalankar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bombay on a Congress party ticket. He presided over the Constituent Assembly (Legislative) which acted as the legislature (between 1946-1950). He did not participate in the Constituent Assembly Debates otherwise.
Later Contributions
Mavalankar became the Speaker of the Provisional Parliament (1951) until the first general elections (1952). He was then chosen as the Speaker for the First Lok Sabha in independent India on 15 May 1952.
As Speaker, he set up various committees like the Rules Committee, the Committee of Privileges, the Business Advisory Committee, the Committee on Private Members Bills and Resolutions, and the Committee on Salaries and Allowances. Despite his links with Congress he was widely considered a non-partisan Speaker. He resigned from the Speaker role in January 1956 due to health issues. Jawaharlal Nehru referred to him as the ‘Father of the Lok Sabha’.
Mavalankar was associated with a number of organisations and trusts that worked on social service, rural upliftment, and the development of the underprivileged.
He passed away on 27 February 1956.
Key Writings
Mavalankar published books in Gujarati and English. One was titled Manavatana Jharna and it contained stories about prisoners. He also wrote Sansmarano which was devoted to his reminiscences of Mahatma Gandhi’s life and the communications he received from Mahatma Gandhi. In the book titled My Life at the Bar, he recounted his experiences at the Bar. His other works include – A Great Experiment and G.V. Mavalankar Speeches and Writings.


 



Resources



Dada Saheb Mavalankar Father of Lok Sabha, edited by Subhash C. Kashyap (1957).



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















