






























IIT Madras wins South Regional Champions of ConQuest 2023. Next stop, national championships - Constitution of India































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										IIT Madras wins South Regional Champions of ConQuest 2023. Next stop, national championships


 



Quiz
IIT Madras wins South Regional Champions of ConQuest 2023. Next stop, national championships









										27 Oct										- 									
27 Oct

2023


Quiz



 Venue
CHRIST (Deemed to be University)


Share









ConQuest 2023 had an exhilarating journey that encompassed Kolkata, Pune, Delhi, and culminated in the South Regional Round in Bangalore. ConQuest: India’s Premier National Quiz on the Indian Constitution and History, organised by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bengaluru (CLPR), strives to foster a vibrant constitutional culture in India. It achieves this through a unique and pedagogical question bank, co-developed with Qshala, drawing from cutting-edge research, archival and contemporary materials, including CLPR’s Constitutionofindia.net.
IIT Madras win the South Regional Round. 
The preliminary rounds at ConQuest’s South Regionals saw the participation of 28 three-member teams comprising 84 students from diverse academic backgrounds. Among them, six teams qualified for the on-stage regional finals: Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru; KLE Law College, Bengaluru; St. Joseph’s University, Bengaluru; two teams from Christ University, Bengaluru and Indian Institute of Technology, Madras.
The finalists faced their first challenge when they were presented with an image of a young British officer on horseback along with an excerpt from his non-fiction book The Story of the Malakand Field Force prefaced on December 30th, 1897, at the Cavalry Barracks in Bangalore. Their task was to identify this historical figure. The answer: Winston Churchill, who was stationed in Bangalore for a period of time. Interestingly, even now, a Winston Churchill unpaid bill is showcased at the well-known Bangalore Club.

Students were introduced to the story of Srinivas Malliah, who joined the freedom movement after hearing Gandhi’s speech during his Khilafat Tour. Malliah was elected to the Indian Constituent Assembly from Madras Province and gained the title of the “Father of Modern Dakshina Kannada District” due to his contributions as an institution and infrastructure builder. Students were asked to identify the famous institution he helped establish, bearing the motto ‘Work is Worship.’ The answer: Karnataka Regional Engineering College, now known as the prestigious National Institute of Technology Surathkal.
 

Full house at Christ (Deemed to be University) during the on-stage finals. 
Another question delved into the significance of the judgment in the Romesh Thapar vs. State of Madras case, which involved the banning of Thapar’s journal, CrossRoads, for criticising Nehruvian policies. This contributed to something pivotal in India—the first amendment to the Constitution that to this day remains a key chapter in India’s constitutional history.
ConQuest 2023’s theme centred around Artificial Intelligence, and several key global and domestic developments were featured in the quiz. One question highlighted a bill introduced by a New York lawmaker aiming to amend housing codes for a more transparent landlord-tenant relationship. This bill generated controversy as it was entirely drafted by an Artificial Intelligence program. Another question spotlighted an AI tool designed to transcribe court proceedings, enhancing efficiency during multi-day hearings.
A buzzer question challenged students to identify an old photograph of a young woman who worked as a clerk in the State Irrigation and Power Department from 1979 to 1983 and later as a teacher in Rairangpur until 1997. This individual was none other than the President, Droupadi Murmu.
After five rounds of intense quizzing, interspersed with audience questions, the Indian Institute of Technology Madras emerged as the champions of ConQuest 2023’s South Regional Round. They were followed by the runners-up, the Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, and the second runners-up, KLE Law College, Bengaluru.
With this, all the regional rounds have concluded, and the top two teams from the four regional rounds will now compete for the coveted title of National Champions of ConQuest in late November.
This article first appeared in ThePrint on 06 November 2023.
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















