






























ConQuest 2023: India’s Premiere National Quiz on the Indian Constitution, History and Politics - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										ConQuest 2023: India’s Premiere National Quiz on the Indian Constitution, History and Politics


 
















ConQuest 2023: India’s Premiere National Quiz on the Indian Constitution, History and Politics



Blog









30 September 2023

Share









 
ConstitutionofIndia.net is excited to announce the 7th edition of ConQuest: India’s Premiere National Quiz on the Indian Constitution, History and Politics.
Since its first edition in 2016, ConQuest has grown to become the largest quiz and educational activity that celebrates India’s constitutional history and politics. Last year, we successfully organized the sixth edition of ConQuest following a two-year hiatus due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It was heartening to witness the continued enthusiastic engagement of students from across India with ConQuest and India’s constitutional heritage, which motivates us to continue providing this unique platform for students to engage with the Constitution. This year, the theme for ConQuest is Artificial Intelligence and its intersection with constitutional matters and related technologies.

ConQuest encourages undergraduate and graduate students from all disciplines including natural sciences, social sciences, engineering, humanities, and law to engage with the Indian Constitution, law, politics, history and current affairs. These include bachelor’s and master’s students. M.Phil and PhD students are not allowed to participate, but are welcome as audience members for their respective regional rounds and/or the National final round.
This year, the Quiz will be held in October and November. We begin with regional rounds in Kolkata, Pune, Delhi and Bengaluru in collaboration with our regional partners. The National Finals will be held in Bengaluru in late November.
Who can participate?
Undergraduate and graduate students from all disciplines. These include ONLY bachelor’s and master’s students. The Quiz is not open to M.Phil and PhD students.
What is the format of the quiz?
It will consist of four regional rounds and a national final. Each regional round consists of a preliminary and a regional final round conducted on the same day.
The preliminary round will be a written test. The six highest scoring teams will go onstage to compete at the regional final. The top two teams from each regional final round will compete at the national final to be held in Bengaluru.
What will the Quiz cover?
The Quiz will focus on the Indian Constitution, politics, law, history and current affairs. A team familiar with ConstitutionofIndia.net will have an advantage.
What are the rules and regulations governing the quiz?
Please find the rules and regulations for ConQuest 2023 here.
How to register?
There is a registration fee of INR 300 to be paid by every team at the venue.
Please register HERE!
Spot registration can be done at your regional partner venue. Spot registrations will close half an hour before the start of the preliminary rounds, at 9:30am. Please ensure you reach your regional partner venue and complete your registration by 9:30am at the latest.
We strongly recommend you register online to allow us to plan effectively.
Where and when will the quiz be held?



Zone 
City 
Date 
Time 
Venue 


East 
Kolkata
06 October 
10am to 1pm 
Loreto College


West
Pune
13 October 
10am to 1pm 
Shankarrao Chavan Law College  


North 
Delhi 
21 October 
10am to 1pm 
National Law University Delhi 


South 
Bengaluru 
27 October 
10am to 1pm 
School of Law, Christ Univeristy



The National Final will be held at St. Joseph’s College of Law, Bengaluru between 9:30am to 1pm on 25 November.
Who to contact in case of queries?
Please write to conquest.quiz@clpr.org.in
ConQuest 2023 is organized by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bangalore.
The project is supported by the South Regional office of the Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung für die Freiheit.
Digital Partner: The Print
Knowledge Partner: QShala

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















