






























Desk Brief: How our Constitution Makers Cut Their Teeth in Municipal Governance - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: How our Constitution Makers Cut Their Teeth in Municipal Governance


 
















Desk Brief: How our Constitution Makers Cut Their Teeth in Municipal Governance



Blog



Editorial Team






20 September 2022

Share









 
									Bombay Municipal Corporation building.
Image credits: MeMumbai.com								

The weaknesses of urban local governmental institutions in India have frequently been exposed under pressure in disaster situations such as the recent Bengaluru flooding. Even in normal circumstances, Indian cities have fared poorly in terms of liveability1. Experts have long flagged the weak finances and lack of devolution of power to these bodies as key reasons for the dismal state of affairs2.
In the interests of federalism and power sharing, our Constituent Assembly left matters concerning local self-government institutions within the purview of the states initially. Only with the 74th Constitutional Amendment have urban local government bodies been given Constitutional status, although some have argued that the amendments have not made any transformative difference3.
Interestingly, in the pre-independence period, several of our nationalist leaders and Constituent Assembly members cut their teeth in politics as members of various urban municipalities, district boards and Municipal Corporations. They made full use of these political forums to raise important issues and expose the doublespeak of the British rulers on important issues related to governance. While the exploits of leaders like Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and Jawaharlal Nehru in the Ahmedabad and Allahabad Corporations respectively are well known, there are several other examples.
Chaudhari Khaliquzzaman and Rustom K. Sidhwa. Image credits: Wikimedia Commons
At least 26 members of the Assembly, apart from the two mentioned above, were involved with municipalities or Municipal Corporations early in their careers. They were involved in various capacities: as ordinary members, heads of committees, chairpersons and even mayors. They came from all parts of the country, from British Indian provinces and Princely States, and from cities big and small. Some of them often referred to their experience in municipalities to inform and enrich the debates in the Assembly.
Rustom K. Sidhwa, was one of those members, often citing his experience as Mayor of Karachi. He raised the point of introducing municipal laws in the Princely States who did not have them as soon as possible. This would elevate the political consciousness of the people of these States by involving them in administrative affairs of day-to-day importance. Again, while speaking in favour of introducing separate secretariats for legislatures, he drew on his experience in navigating bureaucratic hurdles as Mayor.
Chaudhari Khaliquzzaman, who played a pivotal role in the 1916 Lucknow Pact which established Congress-Muslim League unity, also served as chairman of the Lucknow Municipal Board. He argued in favour of an irremovable executive, given that frequent no-confidence motions had made it difficult for the district boards and municipalities to function effectively.
R.K. Shanmukham Chetty and Minoo Masani. Image credits: Alchetron, swarajyamag.com
The first Finance Minister of independent India, R.K. Shanmukham Chetty, started his political career at the young age of 25 as a councillor for the Coimbatore Municipality. Minoo Masani, who was one of the founders of the Congress Socialist Party in 1934, also served as Mayor of Bombay Municipal Corporation briefly in 1943, before going on to become one of the founding members of the Swatantra Party post-independence.
Despite all this experience, Assembly members were reluctant to grant municipal bodies a Constitutional status. In a debate discussing the financial powers of such bodies, Dr. Ambedkar made it clear that such matters are to be left to the states. As a concession to those who would have preferred a more decentralised and direct democracy along Gandhian lines, a Directive Principle instructing the State to provide for village panchayats was included. But no such provisions for municipal bodies were felt to be necessary.
Staff (2022) The global liveability index 2022, Economist Intelligence Unit. Available at: https://www.eiu.com/n/campaigns/global-liveability-index-2022/ (Accessed: September 19, 2022). [↩]Mohanty, P.K. (2021) Financing cities in India: Municipal reforms, fiscal accountability and urban infrastructure. Los Angeles, California: SAGE. [↩]Srivastava, T.N. (2002) “Local ‘Self’ Government and the Constitution,” Economic and Political Weekly, pp. 3190–3198. [↩]

Tags Municipal Governance 








Suggested Reading


Minoo Masani’s Speech on 17 December 1946










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















