






























Binodanand Jha - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Binodanand Jha


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Binodanand Jha
1900 - 1971




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Binodanand Jha was born on 17 April 1900, in Deogarh district of Bihar (present day Jharkhand). He studied at the Central Calcutta College – later renamed Maulana Azad College. He attended the 1919 Session of the Indian National Congress where he was inspired by Gandhi’s call to participate in the freedom movement. Jha then left his studies and joined the movement. 
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Jha spearheaded the Non-Cooperation, Civil disobedience and Quit India movements in the Santhal Pargana region. 
As Congress Party member he held key public and political offices. Jha started out as a member of the Deogarh Municipality (1924-1927). In 1936, he was elected to the Bihar Legislative Assembly and was the State’s Parliamentary Secretary during this period.  
Jha returned to the Assembly in 1946 and joined the State Cabinet as a Minister in charge of multiple departments that included Local Self Government, Health, Labour and Revenue. During his tenure, the Bihar Panchayati Raj Act of 1947 was passed that introduced the three-tier Panchayati Raj system in Bihar. He also worked towards the 1949 Santhal Parganas Tenancy Act that codified tenancy laws in Santhal Pargana and protected Adivasi land.  
Contribution to Constitution Making
Jha was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1948 from Bihar on a Congress party ticket. He was not an active participant in the Assembly.   
Later Contributions
Jha had an active political career post-independence. He was Bihar’s third Chief Minister (1961-1963).  In 1971, he began what would be his last term as a  Lok Sabha member.
He passed away in 1971.


 



Resources



The Story of an Unconventional Leader & Legislator, Sri Biswanath Das, Sanghamitra Dash (2019).
A Short Biography,  Gurukalyan Mahapatra (2006).
Biswanath Das, a tribute by Utkal University (1990). 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















