






























Article 238: Application of provisions of Part VI to States in Part B of the First Schedule - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part VII

Article
238



Application of provisions of Part VI to States in Part B of the First Schedule

Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).



 
 

Version 1


Article 238, Constitution of India 1950
The provisions of Part VI shall apply in relation to the States specified in Part B of the First Schedule as they apply in relation to the States specified in Part A of that Schedule subject to the following modifications and omissions, namely:—
(1) For the word “Governor” wherever it occurs in the said Part VI, except where it occurs for the second time in clause (b) of article 232, the word “Rajpramukh” shall be substituted.
(2) In article 152, for the word and letter “Part A” the word and letter “Part B” shall be substituted.
(3) Articles 155, 156 and 157 shall be omitted.
(4) In article 158,—
(i) in clause (1), for the words “be appointed” the word “becomes” shall be substituted;
(ii) for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) The Rajpramukh shall, unless he has his own residence in the principal seat of Government of the State, be entitled without payment of rent to the use of an official residence and shall be also entitled to such allowances and privileges as the President may, by general or special order, determine.”;
(iii) in clause (4), the words “emoluments and” shall be omitted.
(5) In article 159, after the words “seniormost Judge of that Court available” the words “or in such other manner as may be prescribed in that behalf by the President” shall be inserted.
(6) In article 164, for the proviso to clause (1) the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that in the State of Madhya Bharat there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in charge of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and backward classes or any other work.”
(7) In article 168, for clause (1) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) For every State there shall be a Legislature which shall consist of the Rajpramukh and—
(a) in the State of Mysore, two Houses;
(b) in other States, one House.”
(8) In article 186, for the words “as are specified in the Second Schedule” the words “as the Rajpramukh may determine” shall be substituted.
(9) In article 195, for the words “as were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable in the case of members of the Legislative Assembly of the corresponding Province” the words “as the Rajpramukh may determine” shall be substituted.
(10) In clause (3) of article 202—
(i) for sub-clause (a), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) the allowances of the Rajpramukh and other expenditure relating to his office as determined by the President by general or special order;”
(ii) for sub-clause (f) the following sub-clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(f) in the case of the State of Travancore-Cochin, a sum of fifty-one lakhs of rupees required to be paid annually to the Devaswom fund under the covenant entered into before the commencement of this Constitution by the Rulers of the Indian States of Travancore and Cochin for the formation of the United State of Travancore and Cochin;
(g) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution, or by the Legislature of the State by law, to be so charged.”
(11) In article 208, for clause (2), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature for the State or, where no House of the Legislature for the State existed, the rules of procedure and standing orders in force immediately before such commencement with respect to the Legislative Assembly of such Province as may be specified in that behalf by the Rajpramukh of the State, shall have effect in relation to the Legislature of the State subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be.”
(12) In clause (2) of article 214, for the word “Province” the words “Indian State” shall be substituted.
(13) For article 221, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
“221. (1) There shall be paid to the Judges of each High Court such salaries as may be determined by the President after consultation with the Rajpramukh.
⁠(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowances and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be determined by or under law made by Parliament and, until so determined, to such allowances and rights as may be determined by the President after consultation with the Rajpramukh:
⁠Provided that neither the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.”




Summary


Article 238 was not a part of the Draft Constitution of India 1948. On the 12 and 13 October, 1949, the Chairman of the Drafting Committee proposed to insert Draft Article 211A.
A few amendments were made to Draft Article 211A and it was adopted without any significant debate.
Article 238 was subsequently omitted from the Constitution by way of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















