






























B. Shiva Rao - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										B. Shiva Rao


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
B. Shiva Rao
1891 - 1975




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Kannada
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas 



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Benegal Shiva Rao was born on 26 February 1891 in Benegal, a small village in Udupi, Karnataka. His father was an eminent medical practitioner and his brothers – Sanjiva Rao, Narsing Rau and Rama Rau – would go on to have illustrious careers in the fields of education, civil and judicial services.
Following his brothers’ footsteps, he went to Presidency College, Madras and earned his MA degree. But unlike them, he turned away from the civil services and opted instead for a career in journalism.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Through his oldest brother Sanjiva Rao, Shiva met Annie Besant, a theosophist-educator and leader of the Home Rule movement. He joined Besant’s newspaper New India in 1917 as a sub-editor. At New India, he developed his political skills – Rao started attending and giving speeches at Home Rule meetings.
In the mid-1920s, Rao began engaging with constitutional reform initiatives. He teamed up with Liberal Party leader Tej Bahadur Sapru to critically examine the Montague-Chelmsford Reforms. He joined his long-time mentor Annie Besant to draft the Commonwealth of India Bill in 1925. Rao was also a participant in the Indian Round Table Conference held in London between 1930-31.
Rao was involved in trade union politics. As a trade union leader, he went on to become the delegate on behalf of Indian workers at the International Labour Organisation Conference in Geneva (1929-30) and the President of the National Trades Union Federation in its Calcutta Session (1937).
In the 1930s, Rao was a journalist for the The Hindu (since 1934) and The Manchester Guardian (since 1935). His political connections combined with his journalist role got him direct access to some of the main actors in the Indian independence struggle including members of the Congress Party and the Muslim League, Mahatma Gandhi and top British officials. All these actors often used Rao as an interlocutor in political negotiations.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Rao  was  elected  to the Constituent Assembly from Madras in 1946 under a Congress Party ticket.  He hardly spoke in the Assembly.
His biggest contribution to constitution-making was The Framing of India’s Constitution: Selcted Documents – a 6 volume compilation of documents relating to India’s constitution-making process.
Later Contributions:
Rao was a member of the Indian delegation to the United Nations  in 1947, 1948, 1949 and 1950.
He was elected to India’s first Lok Sabha (1952-56)  from the South Kanara constituency (Present day Mangalore) followed by a term at the Rajya Sabha (1957-60).
On 15 December 1975, Rao passed away in New Delhi.
Key Writings:
In addition to The Framing of India’s Constitution (6 volumes), Shiva Rao wrote extensively for New India, The Hindu, The Manchester Guardian, Baltimore Sun and the New York Nation.
His other notable works include  Select Constitutions of the World (1937), The Industrial Worker in India (1939) and India’s Freedom Fighters: Some Notable Figures (1972)
In the years before his death, Rao was working on his autobiography.


 



Resources



Constitutionalism as Discipline: Benegal Shiva Rao and the Forgotten Histories of the Indian Constitution by Arvind Elangovan (South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies, 2018)
The Benegal Brothers: The Story of a Family and its Times by Kanchan Karopady Bannerjee (Ameya Prakashan, 2010)
A Mangalorean PM and his RBI Governor Brother: The Extraordinary story of the Benegal Brothers by Dr. Anil Shetty (Mangalore Today, 2019)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















