






























Krishna Ballabh Sahay - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Krishna Ballabh Sahay


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Krishna Ballabh Sahay
1898 - 1974




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Krishna Ballabh Sahay was born on 31 December 1898 at Sheikhpura, in Patna district of Bihar. He was the eldest son of Munshi Ganga Prasad, who was then serving as a Daroga in the Indian Police.
He completed his B.A. Hons in English with a first class from St Columbia’s College, Hazaribagh in the year 1919.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Sahay is largely remembered for his participation in the nationalist movements – namely the Civil Disobedience Movement and the Quit India Movement, and for his strong support of the abolition of the Zamindari system.
In the early 1930s, Sahay actively joined Mahatma Gandhi in the Civil Disobedience Movement, during which he was jailed 4 times. When the Quit India Movement started in 1942, Sahay worked with Dr Anugrah Narayan Sinha to carve out an action plan for Bihar, He also personally led the movement in Hazaribagh district. His foray into electoral politics began with his election to the Bihar Legislative Assembly in the year 1937.
Sahay’s strong views against the Zamindari system developed as a result of his witnessing the extreme suffering of the peasantry across Bihar. The legal framework developed by the British had deprived the Adivasi peasantry of their land-holdings. Their customary rights to own the lands they tilled (known as khuntkatti rights), were disregarded and gradually eroded as a result of the apathy of the colonial state. The result was massive out-migration of the Adivasi peasantry of Bihar into neighbouring states as agricultural or indentured labourers.
Sahay was well aware of the injustices meted out to these peasants. In multiple meetings and speeches conducted in the 1940s, he was immensely vocal about these difficulties faced by the peasantry.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Sahay did not actively participate in the Constituent Assembly.
Later Contributions
Sahay was appointed the Revenue Minister of Bihar in the first interim government after independence. He was responsible for the passage of the Zamindari Abolition Bill which made Bihar the first state to pass such an Act.
His tenure as the Chief Minister of Bihar from 1963–67 is remembered for the multiple measures taken to successfully implement the abolishment of the Zamindari system on the ground. His work earned him the title of “Iron Man of Bihar”. He also contributed in the set up several industries including the Bokaro Steel Plant and the Barauni Refinery.
On 3 June, 1974, Sahay passed away as a result of a car accident near Hazaribagh.


 



Resources



The Adivasi Peasantry of Chotanagpur and the Nationalist Response by P.K. Shukla (Social Scientist, 2011)
Politics in Jharkhand during the Civil Disobedience Movement (1930-1934) by L.N. Rana (Indian History Congress, 2005)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















