






























National Law University wins big at the North Region ConQuest quiz 2023 - Constitution of India































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										National Law University wins big at the North Region ConQuest quiz 2023


 



Quiz
National Law University wins big at the North Region ConQuest quiz 2023









										21 Oct										- 									
21 Oct

2023


Quiz



 Venue
National Law University, Delhi


Share










                      Winners of the North Regional Round of ConQuest 2023.
A Constitution-related question flashed on the screen at the National Law University in Dwarka, Delhi. It captivated the students in the audience who had come from various states including Haryana and Punjab. The auditorium was filled with mounting tension, whispers and anticipation. When the volunteer passed the microphone to a student who answered correctly, the audience burst into applause. The anchor’s spirited voice echoed the cheers.
The Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR) organised the quiz, which was attended by undergraduate and master’s students from 53 colleges and universities in New Delhi and adjacent states. It was the 7th edition of ConQuest—the leading national history, politics, and Constitution quiz in India—hosted by the Bengaluru-based not-for-profit trust.
“The team tries to effectively create a constitutional culture in India. One flagship event, as part of trying to spread constitutional awareness and generate some constitutional engagement is ConQuest, which we do every year,” said Vineeth Krishna, Senior Research Associate, CLPR. “The values of the Constitution, not in terms of celebrating the Constitution but the critical engagement of the Constitution that motivates the team. And this is what we want to do.”
The organisation has been hosting ConQuest since 2016. It was halted during the two years of the pandemic. CLPR conducts the quiz to promote constitutional culture through digital public goods and civic education. Its flagship initiative, Constitutionofindia.net, is the world’s most visited internet collection of Indian constitutional and political materials, opinions, and analysis.

Based on their performance, six teams from a variety of colleges and universities in the auditorium were chosen for the next round of the North Region ConQuest quiz. These included teams from the Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC), Hansraj College, two teams from National Law University (NLU), Faculty of Management Studies, and Law Center 2 of the University of Delhi.
Each team comprised three members, and the quiz had a total of five rounds. The trio from NLU—Kartikya Aggarwal, Ananya, and Rishabh—won.
 
This article first appeared in ThePrint on 26 October 2023.  

         


Each team comprised three members, and the quiz had a total of five rounds. The trio from NLU—Kartikya Aggarwal, Ananya, and Rishabh—won.
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















