






























Biswanath Das - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Biswanath Das


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Biswanath Das
1889 - 1984




Key Information

Party: United Front
Constituency: Orissa States
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Odia
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Biswanath Das was born in 1889 in the Belagan village of Ganjam district in the erstwhile Madras Presidency. He obtained his law degree from Calcutta University, after which he went to Berhampur to practice. There, Das worked to empower tenant farmers (ryots) who were forced to pay taxes to the Zamindars or landowners. He formed a ryot union in the Madras Presidency.
Das represented Ganjam district in the Madras Legislative Council from 1921 to 1930. After the district was merged with the newly-created Orissa province in 1936, Das became a member of the Orissa Legislative Assembly. In 1937, he was appointed as Prime Minister of Orissa and he held this position until 1939.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Das resigned from the Madras Legislative Council to join the Salt Satyagraha. He was an active participant in the freedom movement and was later imprisoned for his role in the Quit India movement in 1942.
Contribution to Constitution Making
He was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Orissa on a Congress party ticket. Das made several important interventions in the Assembly, on topics ranging from emergency provisions to the distribution of revenue.
Later Contributions
He served as the Governor of Uttar Pradesh from 16th April 1962 to 30th April 1967. Das was chosen as the leader of the United Front coalition government in 1971 and thus became the Chief Minister of Orissa. He held this post until 1972. 
Das passed away on 2nd June 1984.


 



Key Speeches



Das advocated for fair distribution of revenues between provinces, arguing that high-earning provinces should share their wealth with less-developed regions.
He opposed Draft Article 277 (Article 354) which allowed the President to modify or make exceptions to the provisions regulating the distribution of revenues during an emergency, arguing that this could impact the autonomy of provinces and could be misused if a totalitarian party came to power.



 



Resources



The Story of an Unconventional Leader & Legislator, Sri Biswanath Das, Sanghamitra Dash (2019).
A Short Biography,  Gurukalyan Mahapatra (2006).
Biswanath Das, a tribute by Utkal University (1990). 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















