






























Lala Achint Ram - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Lala Achint Ram


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Lala Achint Ram
1898 - 1961




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: East Punjab
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Lala Achint Ram was born at Amritsar in August 1898. He studied at the Government High Schools in Amritsar and Simla. Later, he pursued higher studies at the D.A.V. College in Lahore.
He married Satyavati Devi, a freedom fighter in 1925 without accepting dowry and denouncing the purdah system.
Role in Indian Independence Movement
Ram joined the Indian independence at a young age and enrolled as a member of the Indian National Congress. He was involved in various movements and was imprisoned 4 times (1930-32, 1939, 1940 and 1942-45) including for his participation in the civil disobedience and Quit India movements. Ram, was also a key leader in the Servants of India Society established by Gopal Krishna Gokhale.
Satyavati Devi was also arrested in 1942 with her three children. She mobilized prisoners and protested against the treatment given to political prisoners in Lahore jail. Her efforts were met with backlash and she was put in solitary confinement. However, her perseverance led to prison reform in Lahore jail.
Ram held many administrative positions. He was a member of the Working Committee and General Secretary of the Punjab Congress. He was a Trustee for the Gulab Devi Tuberculosis Hospital at Lahore (till 1930). He also served as the President of the Punjab Harijan Sewak Sangh and was an executive member of the All-India Refugee Association.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ram was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 from East Punjab on a Congress party ticket. He did not actively participate in the Assembly debates.
Later Contributions
Ram had an active political career post-independence. He was elected as a Member of Parliament in the first and second Lok Sabha from Hisar in present day Haryana (1952 and 57).
Ram along with Satyavati Devi participated actively in Vinobha Bhave’s (a Gandhian leader) Bhoodan movement (a campaign to promote land re-distribution. Ram passed away during a campaign for land re-distribution in 1961.
His son Krishna Kant, who joined him in various movements, went on to become India’s Vice-President (1997).


 



Resources


Who’s Who 1957 (Lok Sabha Secretariat, July 1957)


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















