






























J. B. Kripalani - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										J. B. Kripalani


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
J. B. Kripalani
1888 - 1982




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Chairman: 
Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights 
Member: Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Jiwatram Bhagwandas Kripalani popularly known as Acharya Kripalani was born in Hyderabad, Sindh in 1888. He went on to study at the D.J. Sindh College in Karachi, present-day Pakistan, Wilson College, Bombay and Ferguson College, Pune. In 1912, he began his career as an English and History teacher in Muzaffarpur College, Bihar. He taught briefly at the Benaras University and later became the Principal of the Gujarat Vidyapeeth.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
As a student, Kripalani was involved in the Indian freedom struggle. He was an ardent Gandhi follower and in 1927 joined the Indian National Congress. He took part in the Champaran Satyagraha, Non-Cooperation movement, and Quit India movement.
He was elected as the Congress Party President in 1946 but resigned a year later due to growing differences with the party members on the role of the Working Committee.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Kripalani was elected to the Constituent Assembly from United Province. He was the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights. In the Assembly, he spoke on the Preamble.
Later Contributions:
In 1951 Kripalani started his own political party – Krishak Mazdoor Praja Party – which later merged with the Praja Socialist Party. He left Praja Socialist Party and retired from active politics. He was a critic of the Indira Gandhi government and was arrested during Emergency in 1975.
Key Writings:
Some of his writings include My Times: An Autobiography, Gandhi His Life and Thought, Some stray thoughts.


 



Key Speeches



On 10 December 1946, Kripalani moved the resolution to set in motion the election of Chairman of the Constituent Assembly and adopt rules that govern the proceedings of the Assembly.
During the discussion on Preamble, he urged that the Preamble should not be seen merely as a statement of legal or political principles but also an embodiment of ‘mystic principles’ that lay spiritual and moral guidelines.



 



Resources



Remembering Our Leaders.
Socialism, Sarvodaya and Democracy: The Theoretical Contributions of M.N. Roy, J.P. Narayan and J.B. Kripalani.
Political Thinkers of Modern India: J.B. Kripalani.
J.B. Kripalani, a study of his political ideas.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















