






























Desk Brief: Article 372 and Laiq Ali's Escape - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Article 372 and Laiq Ali’s Escape


 
















Desk Brief: Article 372 and Laiq Ali’s Escape



Blog



Editorial Team






30 September 2021

Share









 
									Laid Ali. Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

In December 1948, Laiq Ali, the then Prime Minister of Hyderabad, was detained at his bungalow as part of the Indian military action to merge Hyderabad with the Indian Union. In March 1950, a month after the Constitution came into effect, Ali escaped detention but was not charged for doing so. Why?
Under colonial rule, an extensive collection of provincial and central laws governed India. What would be the fate of these laws once the new Constitution came into effect? Except for a few over-arching laws like the Government of India Act 1935 and the Indian Independence Act 1947, the Constituent Assembly decided to keep most of India’s existing legal architecture and bring them progressively in line with the new Constitution.
Article 307 of the Draft Constitution 1948 provided for this. It stated that all existing laws would continue to be in force, even after the new Constitution comes into effect. Parliament and the President had the power to modify, remove or replace these laws to make them consistent with the new Constitution. When this Article was taken up for debate in the Assembly, many members came in support of it.
However, some members did not want the President to have the power to modify or repeal laws. Drafting Committee member T.T. Krishnamachari responded to this by arguing that Parliament would take time to make all laws consistent with the Constitution, and hence it was important for the President to have these powers as well. The Assembly seemed partly convinced, and they adopted Draft Article 307 (now Article 372, Constitution of India 1950) albeit with amendments that limited the President’s powers.
Although Krishnamachari anticipated that Parliament would be slow to modify or replace pre-existing laws, Parliament turned its attention to detention laws rather soon. Luckily for Ali, Parliament passed the new Preventive Detention Act 1950 and therefore, the pre-existing law (Public Safety and Public Interest Regulation 1358) under which Ali was detained was now effectively replaced and rendered void. Neither Ali nor his accomplices could be charged for escaping detention. This was confirmed by the High Court of Hyderabad.

Tags DetentionLaiq AliHyderabad 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















