






























Article 61: Procedure for impeachment of the President - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
61



Procedure for impeachment of the President

(1) When a President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge shall be preferred by either House of Parliament.
(2) No such charge shall be preferred unless—
(a) the proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution which has been moved after at
least fourteen days’ notice in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members
of the House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and
(b) such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership
of the House.
(3) When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament, the other House shall
investigate the charge or cause the charge to be investigated and the President shall have the right to appear
and to be represented at such investigation.
(4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution is passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of
the total membership of the House by which the charge was investigated or caused to be investigated,
declaring that the charge preferred against the President has been sustained, such resolution shall have the
effect of removing the President from his office as from the date on which the resolution is so passed.



 
 

Version 1




Article 50, Draft Constitution of India 1948
(1) When a President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge shall be preferred by either House of Parliament.
(2) No such charge shall be preferred unless-
(a) The proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution which has been moved after a notice in writing signed by not less than thirty members of the House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and
(b) Such resolution has been supported by not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House.
(3) When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament, the other House shall investigate the charge or cause the charge to be investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and to be represented at such investigation.
(4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution is passed, supported by not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House by which the charge was investigated or caused to be investigated, declaring that the charge preferred against the President has been sustained, such resolution shall have the effect of removing the President from his office as from the date on which the resolution is so passed.




Version 2


Article 61, Constitution of India 1950
(1) When a President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge shall be preferred by either House of Parliament.
⁠(2) No such charge shall be preferred unless —
(a) the proposal to prefer such change is contained in n resolution which has been moved after at least fourteen days’ notice in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and
(b) such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House.
⁠(3) When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament, the other House shall investigate the charge or cause the charge to be investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and to be represented at such investigation.
⁠(4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution is passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House by which the charge was investigated or caused to be investigated, declaring that the charge preferred against the President has been sustained, such resolution shall have the effect of removing the President from his office as from the date on which the resolution is so passed.




Summary


The Constituent Assembly took up Draft Article 50 for debate on 28 December 1948. The Draft Article set out the procedure by which the President of India could be removed from office.
Clause 1 stated that impeachment proceedings could be initiated in either house of parliament. An amendment was moved to give this power to only the lower house, the Lok Sabha. The amendment’s mover argued that unlike the Upper house, Rajya Sabha, whose members were indirectly elected or nominated, the Lok Sabha was truly representative of the people; And this was important to consider in deciding the impeachment process.
Another member wanted the Chief Justice of Supreme Court to preside over the investigations into the charges framed against the President, similar to what was provided for in the American Constitution. To ensure impartiality, the member argued, it was more appropriate for the Chief Justice to preside over the House’s proceedings, rather than the Speaker or Deputy Speaker. Further, the investigations would involve questions of fact, admissibility of evidence and other legal aspects which were best handled by a member of the judiciary, like the Chief justice.
There was also a proposal to replace the two-thirds majority required to pass an impeachment resolution with just a simple majority. The member who put forward this amendment felt that the two-thirds majority was against the spirit of democracy, was too stringent a criterion, and would make it hard to pass impeachment resolutions.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee responded to all of the above amendments. On the first amendment, he argued that behaviour of the President is a matter of concern for lower and upper houses, and therefore it did not make sense to only allow the lower house to initiate impeachment proceedings. Second, he said that there was no problem in bringing in the Chief Justice to preside over investigations; This could be provided for in the Houses’ rules of procedure and was not necessary to include in the Constitution. On the third amendment, he argued that unlike a no-confidence motion, an impeachment motion would associate the President with shame, moral turpitude and ruination of the public career of the President. Therefore, it was necessary to set the high bar of a two-thirds majority to pass an impeachment motion.
The Draft Article was adopted with a minor amendment.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















