






























Jai Narain Vyas - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Jai Narain Vyas


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Jai Narain Vyas
1899 - 1963




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Rajasthan
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Jai Narain Vyas was born in the princely state of Jodhpur in 1899. In the early 1920s, he started the Marwar Hitkarni Sabha, a group which fought against both English and non-Jodhpuri administrators. It initially received the support of the Maharaja of Jodhpur, but was banned in 1924 for its anti-royalty stance.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Undeterred by this first misadventure, Vyas went on to found a series of organisations around which he could centre his political activities. These included the Jodhpur Praja Mandal, the Youth League, and the Marwar Lok Parishad. He found support in neighbouring Ajmer, which was a British enclave among the Princely States of Rajasthan.
Vyas was also an active participant in movements led by the Congress Party. He was imprisoned five times, including for a period of two years from 1942-44 for his involvement in the freedom struggle.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Vyas was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Jodhpur on a Congress party ticket. He intervened in the debates on state autonomy, the rights of former rulers of Princely States, and the drawing of state boundaries.
Later Contributions
Vyas became the Prime Minister of the princely state of Jodhpur in March 1948, although he resigned from the post in April 1949. He continued to be an active member of the Congress party and headed the Rajputana Pradesh Congress Committee until 1949.
Later, he became the Chief Minister of the independent state of Rajasthan, a position that he held twice between 1951 and 1954.
Vyas passed away on 14 March 1963.


 



Key Speeches



Speaking on the successful integration of the Princely States, Vyas expressed concern that the Centre would exercise excessive control in the affairs of those states that had not yet formed state legislatures.
He argued in favour of restricting citizenship rights of princes so that they did not unduly interfere in the administration of their erstwhile kingdoms.
On the matter of state boundaries, he argued against the incorporation of Sirohi into the territory of Bombay rather than Rajasthan.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















