






























Mohammad Ismail Khan - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Mohammad Ismail Khan


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Mohammad Ismail Khan
1884 - 1958




Key Information

Party: All-India Muslim League
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Nawab Mohammad Ismail Khan was an eminent politician and activist from the All-India Muslim League. He is often considered as one of the founding members of Pakistan because of his leading role in the Khilafat Movement and Pakistan Movement. He was also considered a close friend and confidant of Muhammad Ali Jinnah.
He was born in August 1884 in Meerut, present-day Uttar Pradesh. His father was Nawab Mohammad Ishak Khan of Jehangirabad and was the grandson of the Urdu and Persian poet, Nawab Mustafa Khan Shefta.
He completed his early schooling in India and moved to England at the age of 12 to continue his education as a full-time boarder at Tonbridge School in Kent. He finished his university studies at St John’s College, Cambridge and became a barrister of the Honourable Society of the Inner Temple (Inns of Court School of Law).
In 1908, he returned to India at the age of 24 and began practising law. His father, who was serving as a judge in Allahabad, was friends with Pandit Motilal Nehru. This friendship allowed Ismail Khan to begin his law career as an assistant lawyer to Motilal Nehru and also stay with the Nehru family at Anand Bhavan.
He served two terms as Vice-Chancellor of Aligarh Muslim University between 1934-35 and 1947-48 and remained as one of its trustees for many years.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Ismail Khan was integral in representing the interests of Indian Muslims during the Independence movement. He became a member of the Working Committee of the Muslim League in 1910 – a position he held for more than four decades. During his time with the Muslim League, he was also elected to the Central Legislative Assembly in 1923 from United Provinces. He presided over the All-India Khilafat Committee in the Assembly, registering his opposition to the Indian National Congress campaign for Swaraj through civil disobedience.
In addition to this, he was the head of the following organisations: the All-India Muslim Civil Defence Association, the Parliamentary Board, the All-Parties Muslim Conference and the Unity Board.
His role in the Khilafat Movement involved travelling the country to convey the meaning of the movement to people. He worked closely with Congress leaders during this time, but was only supportive of demands that supported Indian Muslims.
Ismail Khan was a member of the founding committee of Jamia Milia Islamia University, established in 1920 on the foundation of anti-colonial Islamic activism and pro-independence influences of western educated Indian Muslims.
Khan was in close correspondence with Jawaharlal Nehru, despite his alliance with Jinnah. This became a sore point in their friendship and prompted Jinnah to demand that Ismail Khan cease the correspondence immediately. In a display of his independent and opinionated nature, the Nawab briefly resigned from the Working Committee, but was persuaded to re-join by Liaquat Ali Khan.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ismail Khan was elected to the Constituent Assembly from United Provinces as a member of the Muslim League. He was one of the 28 members of the Muslim League in the Assembly, not to be confused with Muhammed Ismail Sahib from Madras. He was not a member of any committee.
In the debate to approve the Advisory Committee’s report on Minority Rights, the Nawab enquired about separate electorates for Indian Muslims. Unlike his namesake from Madras, Ismail Khan was against the provision of separate electorates, arguing that it was not a necessary safeguard for the rights of the Muslim minority in India.
Later Contributions
Despite being a key proponent of the Pakistan Movement, Ismail Khan chose to stay back in India post-Independence. Although several people tried to convince him to move to Pakistan including then Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan, he wanted to remain in India to continue advocating for the interests of Indian Muslims. He also continued to be a member of the Legislative Assembly after Independence.
Khan died on 28 June 1958 in Meerut and was buried at his family graveyard at the shrine of Nizamuddin Auliya.
Khan’s residence, the historic Mustafa Castle, was built by his father as a memorial for his grandfather. This residence was a bustling centre of political activity during the Independence Movement and was the headquarters of the Uttar Pradesh Muslim League. It also temporarily housed several prominent leaders including Mahatma Gandhi, Nehru, Sarojini Naidu and Jinnah.


 



Key Speeches


Ismail Khan made some observations in the debates on minority rights on the issue of separate electorates for Muslims.


 



Resources



The Reorganization of the All India Muslim League under the Quaid-i-Azam by Ansar Zahid Khan
All India Muslim League; split and reunification by Abdul Razzaq Shahid



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















