






























Welcome to Our New Website! - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Welcome to Our New Website!


 
















Welcome to Our New Website!



Blog



Editorial Team






14 April 2023

Share









 
We are excited to announce the launch of Constitutionofindia.net 3.0 on the occasion of Ambedkar Jayanti 2023. It has been a journey of over 7 years since we launched the website in 2016, with the aim of making the Indian Constituent Assembly Debates accessible in a vibrant and engaging format. Today the site has become the most comprehensive and widely accessed digital portal for Indian constitutional and political history, used by students, teachers, lawyers, and the general public in India and around the world.
Version 3 of Constitutionofindia.net is packed with major upgrades in functionality, an expanded range of resources, and a comprehensive redesign aimed at emphasizing accessibility and readability. Here are some of the key highlights:

Read
Our website’s core is the comprehensive database of primary materials on Indian constitutional and political history. To this database, we have now added the Constituent Assembly’s Committee Reports, critical documents that shaped the Constitution of India 1950. These Reports are paragraph numbered and searchable, and we plan to progressively add more in the coming weeks.

Explore
Our new section on Committees throws light on their role in the Constituent Assembly. We have added a one-page summary of the origins, composition and work of 9 of these Committees, with more on the way. We have also re-designed the Framers page to include a banner that offers a concise overview of essential information about them.

Learn
We have an exclusive section to house the educational materials that we’ve developed over the years. These materials are drawn from the website’s primary materials and other sections of the site that we’ve deployed at our workshops, seminars, and public engagement activities, and can be filtered by grade, topic, or type.


Engage
We now have brand new pages exclusively for podcasts, videos, and archival audio-visual content. Our blog now has a vibrant new look that we hope offers a more enriching reading experience. We’ve also introduced a new search functionality to help you locate content that interests you.


Advanced Search
Our Advanced Search function, which allows you to browse through the Constituent Assembly Debates and Historical Constitutions for specific topics and keywords, now includes the Committee Reports as well. A new and improved advanced search is currently under beta-testing and will be released shortly, boasting an improved visual interface with more reliable, quicker, and accurate search results.


Home Page
The new Home Page is designed to bring the depth and range of content to the forefront, making it easy for users to browse and quickly access any section of the site they want to visit. One useful feature is the mega menu at the top of the page, which gives users a bird’s eye view of the site and brief introductions to all sections. This allows users to easily navigate through the site and find the information they need.
We hope that this gives you a sense of what’s new on ConstitutionofIndia.net 3.0. However, this does not cover everything, and in the coming weeks, we will take up different sections of the site and go into more detail on what’s new and how to make the best use of the new features. We encourage you to explore the site and let us know your feedback.
Credits
Constitutionofindia.net 3.0 was the result of almost a year’s worth of effort put in by several individuals and teams The project was conceptualized and anchored by the Constitutionofindia.net team at the Centre for Law and Policy Research. Sudhir Krishnaswamy, the Chief Editor, and Vineeth Krishna, the Senior Associate Editor, led this project with a team of Associate Editors that included Varsha Nair, Siddharth Jha, Tanya Kini, Anish Saha, Kalyani Menon and Meenakshi Ramkumar.
The Design Brew team, comprising Aparna Ranjan, Bhairavi Balasubramanian and Sagarika Bhatia, helped us reimagine the brand identity of the site. They produced a new logo, stunning page designs and beautiful illustrations. The Redstart team, of George Karimundackal, Fredy Sudhir and Nikhil Thomas, anchored website development and technical revamp. The website uses Typesense as the search engine for Advanced Search, with Jason Bosco and Kishore Nallan from Typesense speeding up the development of key features. Digamber Pradhan and Sachet Gurung from CodeManas worked with Typesense and Redstart to integrate Typesense search on the website.

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Should Courts Review Delimitation?

22 March 2023
												• By Vineeth Krishna

There are allegations that the recent delimitation exercises have redrawn constituency boundaries to give an advantage to a particular political party. Should courts intervene?


 4 mins										




 

Bhagat Singh Hanged, Karachi Resolution Passed

23 March 2023
												• By Vineeth Krishna

On 23 March 1931 the British hanged Bhagat Singh for his involvement in the Lahore Conspiracy Case. Just a week later, the the Indian National Congress  passed the iconic Karachi Resolution 1931. Were these two historic events connected?


 3 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















