






























Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri
1889 - 1955




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Assam
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Assamese
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Provincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri was born in Kamrup, Assam on 2nd May 1889. Chaudhuri attended Government High Schools in Nowgong, Gauhati, Dhubri in Assam and went on to obtain degrees in Arts and Law from the Scottish Church College, Presidency College and Ripon College. Later, he became a Senior Advocate in the Supreme Court of India.
He was deeply involved in Assamese politics, and became a member of the Assam legislature from 1927 to 1945.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Chaudhuri was one of the leaders of the non-cooperation movement in Assam.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Chaudhuri was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Assam on a Congress party ticket. In the Assembly, he intervened on issues ranging from citizenship, discrimination and untouchability.


 



Key Speeches



During the discussion around Draft Article 5A (Article 6 of the Constitution of India – which deals with principles of citizenship of persons who migrated from Pakistan to India during partition) Chaudhuri argued for ensuring citizenship rights for people who have migrated to Assam long before the partition.
Chaudhuri pointed out that Draft Article 11 (Article 17 of the Constitution of India, 1950) which prohibits untouchability was vague as it did not define untouchability. Through his amendment, he sought to clarify the meaning and scope of untouchability.
When the Assembly was debating Draft Article 9 (Article 15 of the Constitution of India) which prohibits discrimination, Chaudhuri argued for including dress based non-discrimination.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















