






























Part XII Archives - Constitution of India






















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII







 
Part XII
Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits
Part XII of the Constitution contains financial provisions including those related to taxation, definition of various Funds, the right to hold property, and borrowing by Union and State governments.
Read More 


 





Articles 264 to 300A





Chapter I.—Finance




Article 264: Interpretation


Article 265: Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law


Article 266: Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the States


Article 267: Contingency Fund


Article 268: Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by the States


Article 268A: Service tax levied by Union and collected and appropriated by the Union and the States


Article 269: Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the States


Article 269A: Levy and collection of goods and services tax in course of inter-State trade or commerce


Article 270: Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the States


Article 271: Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union


Article 272: Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union and may be distributed between the Union and the States


Article 273: Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products


Article 274: Prior recommendation of President required to Bills affecting taxation in which States are interested


Article 275: Grants from the Union to certain States


Article 276: Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments


Article 277: Savings


Article 278: Agreement with States in Part B of the First Schedule with regard to certain financial matters


Article 279: Calculation of “net proceeds”, etc.


Article 279A: Goods and Services Tax Council


Article 280: Finance Commission


Article 281: Recommendations of the Finance Commission


Article 282: Expenditure defrayable by the Union or a State out of its revenues


Article 283: Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public accounts.


Article 284: Custody of suitors’ deposits and other moneys received by public servants and courts


Article 285: Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation


Article 286: Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of goods


Article 287: Exemption from taxes on electricity


Article 288:  Exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or electricity in certain cases


Article 289: Exemption of property and income of a State from Union taxation


Article 290: Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions


Article 290A: Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds


Article 291: Privy purse sums of Rulers








Chapter II.—Borrowing




Article 292: Borrowing by the Government of India


Article 293: Borrowing by State








Chapter III.—Property, Contracts, Rights, Liabilities, Obligations and Suits




Article 294: Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in certain cases


Article 295: Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in other cases


Article 296: Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia


Article 297: Things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf and resources of the exclusive economic zone to vest in the Union


Article 298: Power to carry on trade, etc.


Article 299: Contracts


Article 300: Suits and proceedings








Chapter IV.—Right to Property




Article 300A: Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law





 
 



 
More About Part XII: Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits

Part XII of the Constitution contains financial provisions including those related to taxation, definition of various Funds, the right to hold property, and borrowing by Union and State governments.




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















