






























Harihar Nath Shastri - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Harihar Nath Shastri


 



Constituent Assembly Members
Harihar Nath Shastri
1904 - 




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Harihar Nath Shastri was born on 26 October 1904 at Wazirapur in present-day Uttar Pradesh. He studied at the Edward Memorial Institute and went on to pursue higher education at Benaras Hindu University and Kashi Vidyapith.
Shastri enjoyed playing chess for recreation. His other hobbies included playing bridge and travelling.
Role in Indian Independence Movement
Shastri joined the Indian independence movement at a young age. He enrolled as a member of the Indian National Congress in 1928. He was imprisoned 7 times for his involvement in Indian freedom movement.
He was a member of civil society organisations like the Servants of People Society – founded by Lala Lajpat Rai in 1921.
Shastri held a number of important political and administrative positions. He was a member of the Municipal Committee, Kanpur (1934-40) and the Kanpur Improvement Trust (1938-51). He was elected to U.P. Legislative Council (1937-44) and U.P. Legislative Assembly (1946-50).
Shastri is well renowned for his contribution to the labour movement in Uttar Pradesh focusing on the textile industry in Kanpur. He was the President of the All-India Trade Union Congress (1933-35) and the Indian National Trade Union (1947-49). He brought together the labour movement and the Indian national movement in Uttar Pradesh. He linked the upliftment of workers with the end of colonial rule. He believed that ‘swaraj’ without the emancipation of workers was not complete ‘swaraj’. 
Shastri’s socialist politics was unique because his approach to labour issues was more radical than his contemporaries. He disagreed with socialists like B. Shiva Rao who believed that labour movements should adopt constitutional means to put forward their grievances. Shastri instead felt that unconstitutional acts of industrialists cannot be countered by constitutional agitations by the workers. Despite his radical views, Shastri was considered a ‘moderate’ by British officials, as opposed to the ‘communists’ in the 1930s who were termed as ‘agitators’. 
He edited a weekly magazine called Mazdoor through which he aimed to politically mobilise labourers and spread awareness of labour issues..
Shastri lived in the Mazdoor Basti at Gwaltoli. Although he belonged to the middle class, he was able to transcend class differences with labourers by living with them.  
Contribution to Constitution Making
Shastri was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 from the United Provinces on a Congress party ticket. He did not participate in the Assembly debates.  
Contributions Post-Independence 
Shastri continued to work on labour issues post-independence. He was the General Secretary of the All-India Trade Union (1949). He even represented Indian workers on the international stage. He was:  

The Indian labour representative at the International Labour Conference (1948, 1951 and 1952),  
A member of the Governing Body of the International Labour Organisation,  
Vice-President of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, and   
The Indian workers’ representative in the first Asian Regional Conference at Ceylon (1950).  

Shastri was elected as the first member of Parliament from Kanpur to the Lok Sabha in 1952.  
Key Writings

Mir Kasim(in Hindi)
History of Trade Union Movement 



 



Resources



Lost Worlds: Indian Labour and Its Forgotten Histories, by Chitra Joshi (Permanent Black, 2003)
Factional Politics in an Indian State: The Congress Party in Uttar Pradesh, by Paul Brass (iUniverse, 2008)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















