






























Fifth Edition of ConQuest Kicks Off Online, Preliminary Results Out - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Fifth Edition of ConQuest Kicks Off Online, Preliminary Results Out


 



Quiz
Fifth Edition of ConQuest Kicks Off Online, Preliminary Results Out
The Print team









										03 Oct										- 									
04 Oct

2020


Quiz



 Venue
Virtual


Share









The fifth edition of ConQuest, India’s premier national quiz on the Constitution, history and politics, went completely online.
An initiative by the Centre for Law & Policy Research (CLPR), the quiz saw more than 180 three-member teams from across disciplines participate in the regional preliminary rounds that were conducted over the weekend of 3-4 October.
Questions a mix of Indian political, constitutional history
The questions were an interesting mix of Indian political and constitutional history, with some being pegged to contemporary developments, both in India and abroad.
Contestants in the East Regional Preliminary Round were flummoxed by a question about a historical constitutional document. Shown a picture of Maharaja Bochchandra Singh, teams had to answer: Which short-lived Act gave President-like powers to this monarch during the early days of Independence?
The teams were given clues, such as the fact that the Act was repealed due to the Instrument of Accession. However, out of 36 teams, only two got the answer right — the Manipur State Constitution Act, 1947.
Maharaja Bodhchandra Singh of the princely state of Manipur wanted Manipur to be an independent state, rather than become a part of the Indian Union. When his subjects pushed for democratic governance, the Maharaja acceded to their demands and appointed a Constitution-making committee. This committee drafted the Manipur State Constitution Act, which made Manipur a constitutional monarchy, similar to England, and gave the Maharaja powers comparable to the President of India, or the British monarch. However, political pressures led to Manipur becoming a part of the Indian Union; and the Act was repealed by the signing of the Instrument of Accession.
Contestants in the South Regional Preliminary Round performed well on the question about the ‘Back to Track’ initiative in Los Angeles, California. They had to identify which ‘frequenter of Chennai’s Besant Nagar Beach’ had introduced this initiative, which equips former prisoners with skills to improve their employability. Given the immense publicity surrounding the US elections’ first Vice-Presidential candidate of Indian origin, more than half the teams were able to guess the correct answer: Kamala Harris.
The teams that made it
Among the 56 teams from the North Regional Round, the following eight made to the next round — Shaheed Bhagat Singh College; St. Stephens; University School of Law and Legal Studies, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University; Hindu College; Delhi School of Journalism; Ramjas College; Sri Venkateswara College; and two teams from Dr. Ram Manohar Lohiya National Law University.
The South Regional Round, too, saw 56 teams battling it out. The top eight teams include two teams from National Law School of India University, Bangalore; 2 teams from School of Law Christ; NALSAR; Indian Institute of Technology, Madras; The Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Hyderabad and St Joseph’s College (Autonomous).
Out of the 35 teams from the West Regional Round, the ones that made it to the next level were: Government Law College; NMIMS Kirit P Mehta School of Law; ILS Law College, Pune; two teams from the National Law Institute University, Bhopal; two teams from Symbiosis Law School, Pune and the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad.
The East Regional Rounds saw 36 teams participate. The top eight teams that made it to the next round are two teams from the West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata; Chanakya National Law University; National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur; two teams from National Law University-Odisha; National University of Study and Research in Law, Ranchi and Jogesh Chandra Chaudhuri Law College.
Over the next two weekends, these teams will be matched up in the Knock-Out Rounds to win a spot in the Grand Finale to be held on 25 October.


This report first appeared in ThePrint on 8 October 2020.








More in events





 Quiz



Knockout Rounds of Fifth Edition of ConQuest Begin, Four Teams Qualify for Grand Finale
 Virtual



Event Report


10 Oct
2020







 Quiz



Four More Teams Qualify, Stage is Set for ConQuest Grand Finale on 25 October
 Virtual



Event Report


17 Oct
2020


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















