






























Damodar Swarup Seth - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Damodar Swarup Seth


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Damodar Swarup Seth
1896 - 1965




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Damodar Swarup Seth was born in February 1896 in Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh. He completed his primary education at the Government High School and secondary education at A.P. Mission High School, Allahabad. He completed his education from Lucknow’s Reid Christian College.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Seth played a vital role in the Indian freedom struggle and was arrested on several occasions for his participation in various independence movements. He was among 40 people arrested for their role in the 1925 Kakori Conspiracy Case, a train robbery. Seth was also a member of several political organisations like the All India Congress Committee and UP Satyagraha Council. He served as the Secretary of the Congress Socialist Party in 1935, the President of the UP Congress Committee in 1946 and as the national executive member of the Socialist Party of India.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Seth was elected to the Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress Party ticket. His interventions in the Assembly were focused on Fundamental Rights and the need for a new Constituent Assembly.
Later Contributions
Not much is known about Seth’s life post 1949. He passed away in 1965.


 



Key Speeches



Seth was an advocate for minority rights in India. However, he was against the idea of reservations for ‘backward classes’. During an Assembly debate on the fundamental right of equality of opportunity, he stated that it was necessary to provide backward classes with concession, so they had equality of opportunity but he also felt that qualification for a public post should be on the basis of merits and reservation in public employment would be a ‘negation of efficiency.’
In a debate around the article on the right given to religious and linguistic minorities, Seth argued that minorities must only be recognized on the basis of language and not a religion since India was a secular state.
In another speech in the Assembly, he expressed the need for a separate segment for the freedom of press under the fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression. He believed that the press was getting more powerful by the day and it was necessary to provide them with separate and explicit freedom.
In the debate on finalisation of the Draft Constitution, he moved an amendment seeking the election of a completely new Constituent Assembly. He stated that the Assembly did not represent the whole country and the members were not directly elected by the people. Hence, he felt that the House was not competent to frame a Constitution for the entire country.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















