






























Chapter IV.—The Union Judiciary Archives - Constitution of India




















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII








Chapter IV.—The Union Judiciary
Chapter IV.—The Union Judiciary

Read More 


 





Articles 124 to 147








Article 124: Establishment and constitution of Supreme Court


Article 125: Salaries, etc., of Judges


Article 126: Appointment of acting Chief Justice


Article 127: Appointment of ad hoc Judges


Article 128: Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court


Article 129: Supreme Court to be a court of record


Article 130: Seat of Supreme Court


Article 131: Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court


Article 132: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in certain cases


Article 133: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in regard to civil matters


Article 134: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters


Article 134A: Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court


Article 135: Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court


Article 136: Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court


Article 137: Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court


Article 138: Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court


Article 139: Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain writs


Article 139A: Transfer of certain cases


Article 140: Ancillary powers of Supreme Court


Article 141: Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts


Article 142: Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders as to discovery, etc.


Article 143: Power of President to consult Supreme Court


Article 144: Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme Court


Article 145: Rules of Court, etc.


Article 146: Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court


Article 147: Interpretation





 
 




More About Chapter IV.—The Union Judiciary: Chapter IV.—The Union Judiciary





 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















