






























Balwantrai Gopalji Mehta - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Balwantrai Gopalji Mehta


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Balwantrai Gopalji Mehta
1899 - 1965




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Saurashtra
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Gujarati
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Balwant Rai Gopalji Mehta was born on 19 February 1899, in Bhavnagar district of present-day Gujarat. Not much is known of his early education, except that he went to Samaldas College, Bhavnagar and later Gujarat College, Ahmedabad to pursue a bachelor’s degree. But he never got the degree due to his unwavering decision to not accept anything from the colonial government. Despite the lack of a degree, Mehta would go onto have a career in journalism.  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Since the 1920s, Mehta was active in Congress politics. He took part in both the Non-Cooperation Movement (1920) and the Civil Disobedience Movement (1930-32), and was imprisoned close to eight times over a period of seven years. He was among the prominent Gujarati activists who came together in the 1928 Bardoli Satyagraha to protest against the unjust raising of taxes in the Bombay Presidency. He also participated in the Quit India Movement and had to spend three years in jail.  
Mehta’s political life was deeply enmeshed in the politics of the Princely States. In 1928 he became General Secretary of the All-India States Peoples Conference, which aimed to promote and bring together the progressive political movements in the Princely States. He remained General Secretary until 1935, and became Vice-President of the Conference in 1946. For a brief period in 1943, Mehta was Prime Minister of Bhavnagar State. He was also Secretary and President of the Bhavnagar Praja Parishad between 1946-48. 
Apart from his party commitments, Mehta was also a life member of Lala Lajpat Rai’s Servants of the People Society since 1927. The society aimed to created social workers modelled on missionaries who would be committed to serving India. Eventually, he would serve as the Vice-President of the Society in 1957.  
Contribution to Constitution Making
Mehta was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Princely State of Saurashtra on a Congress Party ticket. He did not actively take part in the Constituent Assembly proceedings. 
Later Contributions
In 1948 Bhavnagar acceded to the Indian Union and became a part of the Saurashtra State. Mehta’s role in the politics of the region gradually saw him rise within Congress. In 1950, he was elected Secretary of the Gujarat Pradesh Congress Committee for a period of two years.  During Nehru’s Congress Presidency in 1954, Mehta was elected General Secretary of Congress for a one-year term.   
Mehta was a member of the Saurashtra Legislative Assembly between 1949-52. He was Deputy Chief Minister between 1948-50. He was also an elected member of the First Lok Sabha between 1952-57. He would win a second term in 1962.  
By then there was a growing power struggle within the Gujarat Congress, particularly between Congress leaders from mainland Gujarat and those from the ex-Princely State of Saurashtra. As someone who had been deeply involved in all-India Congress politics for a long time, Mehta was acceptable to most. Thus, in 1963, he became the Chief Minister of Gujarat.  
Mehta is most known for his contributions to the country’s path to democratic decentralization and the establishment of the Panchayati Raj institutions. In 1957, he headed a Central Committee set up to explore the workings of the Community Development Projects and the National Extension Service which were Government ventures to tackle problems at the level of local administration. The Committee under Mehta’s leadership suggested a three-tier Panchayati Raj system that would eventually take shape across India. He was also Chairman of the Lok Sabha’s Estimates Committee between 1955-57. 
Mehta’s life was cut short when the aircraft carrying him was accidentally shot down by a Pakistan Air Force pilot during the Indo-Pak war of 1965.  
On 17 February 2000, the Government of India released a postage stamp commemorating Mehta. 


 



Resources



Freedom Fighter Balwantrai Gopalji Mehta by News on Air Official (September 2021)
Members Bioprofile by Loksabha



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















