






























Desk Brief: Why Hindi is not our National Language - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Why Hindi is not our National Language


 
















Desk Brief: Why Hindi is not our National Language



Blog



Editorial Team






27 September 2021

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

On 14 September 1949, Hindi was accepted as the official language by the Constituent Assembly, which is celebrated as Hindi Diwas every year. Every year this date is also typically accompanied with statements by Hindi supporters, that predictably prompt vigorous responses from political leaders and regional language activists from non-Hindi speaking regions. These exchanges are foreshadowed by earlier debates on the national language in the Constituent Assembly which deserve closer attention.
The ”Hindi-wallahs” (as Granville Austin referred to them) in the Assembly included those who proposed to make Hindi India’s sole national language, to replace English as the official language for governmental communication, and to be promoted as a second language in non-Hindi speaking states. They also preferred a Sanskritised version of Hindi, divested of the diverse cultural influences that had influenced its development. Many other members, from both Hindi-speaking and non-Hindi-speaking regions, were not satisfied with this proposal. Shankar Rao Deo, a Gandhian, said:
“They appeal to us in the name of unity, in the name of culture, that this country must have one language. They say unless this country has one language, there cannot be unity and one culture; and if there is no unity and one culture, then, this country has no future. in the same breath we are told that the regional languages must be enriched… I cannot understand how these two things can go together. I think we are speaking with two minds. We cannot hope to have one language for the whole country and at the same time work for the enrichment of the regional languages and assert that they must be maintained, and they must have a permanent place in the national structure or life. I have tried my best to understand how these two things can go together but failed…”
Hindi antagonists responded that if the primary function of a national language is to unite India, then English was a workable choice. Firstly, different regions of India might be more inclined to adopt neutral English rather than Hindi as a link language for official communication. Secondly, English had already unified different parts of India and facilitated communication, although only among a certain class of multilingual Indians. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad observed that English had become essential to the Indian Union in civilizational terms:
“We have got to admit that so far as language is concerned North and South are two different parts. The union of North and South has been made possible only through the medium of English. If today we give up English then this linguistic relationship will cease to exist.”
However, English was also seen as a colonial and ‘foreign’ language. As a result, various members were anxious about making English the national language. Faced with the existential consequences of a hasty adoption of a national language, the founders avoided declaring a national language at all. Instead, they used the more ambiguous term ‘official language’.
Under the ‘Munshi-Ayyangar’ formula, Hindi in the Devanagari script was declared as an ‘official language’ for the Union government, along with English. Also, 13 other languages were included in the 8th Schedule (now expanded to 22) as ‘official languages’, from which elements may be drawn for the enrichment of Hindi. In this way, the Assembly tried to de-link language from nationalism and national identity, and to an extent succeeded in placating all parties to the debate.

Tags SchedulesLanguageHindi 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















