






























Himatsinhji - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Himatsinhji


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Himatsinhji
1897 - 1973




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Saurashtra
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early life
Himatsinhji was born in Jamnagar on 12 August 1897. He completed his education from Rajkumar College, Rajkot, Malvern College, England, and Oxford.
In 1918 he joined the Indian Army as Captain. In 1926, his proficiency in Japanese got him appointed as a Japanese Interpreter at the Assistant Military Attache to Tokyo, British Embassy – a post he held till 1929.
Between 1931 to 1939 he was Military Secretary and Home Members for Nawangar State and simultaneously a member of the Advisory Military Committee for the Princes Chamber.
In 1940, he returned to diplomatic life and Japan, again as Assistant Millitary Attache for year. He was then appointed as the First Secretary of the British Embassy from 1941to 1942.
It was inevitable for Himatsinhji to formally join the Diplomatic Service (whilst remaining in the Army). In 1946, he was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly as a representative of the Indian Armed Forces.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Not much is known about Himatsimhji’s involvement in the Indian independence movement. He probably played little to no role considering he held a number of civil and military positions under the British Indian government.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Himatsinhji was a member of the Constituent Assembly but did not speak during the debates. There is no information on which constituency or through which party’s ticket, he was elected to the Assembly.
Later Contributions
He retired from the Indian Army in 1950 after which became a Whip of the Congress Party India’s Deputy Minister of Defence.
He was elected to India’s first Lok Sabha in 1952 but resigned after being appointed as the Lt. Governor of Himachal Pradesh.
Himatsinhji passed away on 9 January 1973.


 



Resources



Who’s Who, Lok Sabha Publication (1950) 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















