






























Surendra Mohan Ghose - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Surendra Mohan Ghose


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Surendra Mohan Ghose
1893 - 1976




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Surendra Mohan Ghose was born on 22 April 1893 in Mymensingh (in present day Bangladesh). He completed his education from Mritunjoy High School and Ananda Mohan College, Mymensingh.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
In 1908, still in his teens, Ghose joined Jugantar, a secret revolutionary party founded by Sri Aurobindo, to fight for Indian independence through armed struggle. Around the same time, the British arrested him for possession of an unlicensed revolver and he spent a year in jail. In 1912, Ghose was given a leadership position within the party but his tenure was cut short as the British arrested him again.
Around 1920, he was released from prison and joined the Indian National Congress. He continued his affiliation with Jugantar. He was arrested for the third time and imprisoned at Madalay Jail. Incidentally, he was joined by Subhas Chandra Bose in 1924. In all, Ghose spent nearly 23 years in prison, 14 more than Jawaharlal Nehru.
After being released, Ghose rose up the Congress Party ranks and served as the President of the Bengal Provincial Congress Committee between 1939-1950. In contrast to the ‘revolutionary’ methods of his political youth, Ghose took part in the non-violent Satyagraha in 1940.
He also worked towards the removal of untouchability and other social reforms.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ghose was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bengal through a Congress Party ticket. He was not an active participant in the Assembly.
Later Contributions
Ghose was the Chairman of the House Committee of the Provincial Parliament in 1951 was elected to the first Lok Sabha in 1952. Interestingly, Ghose was a member of the Jugantar Party of Bengal, Swarjya Party, Independent League and the All-India Congress Committee; Not much is known about how he managed multiple party affiliations.
He was also on the Board of Advisers of the All-India Radio, Calcutta.
In his spare time, Ghose enjoyed gardening and practising yoga.
He passed away on 7 September 1976.


 



Resources



Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India)
Two Talks of Surendra Mohan Ghosh on Sri Aurobindo by Overmann Foundation (December, 2013)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















