






























N B Khare - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										N B Khare


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
N B Khare
1884 - 1970




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Ajmer-Merwera
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Marathi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
N. B. Khare was born on 19 March 1884 at Panvel. After completing his high school education at the Maratha High School, Bombay he joined the Government College at Jubbulpur. He then studied at the Medical College, Lahore and completed his graduation rewarded with a gold medal for surgery. He then set up a private medical practice.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Khare had an active political life. He was a member of Indian National Congress (1916 to 1938) and a member of the All-India Congress Committee. He served as the President of Central Provinces Provincial Congress Committee and Harijan Sewak Sangh, Nagpur – a voluntary organisation focusing on the welfare of the Dalit community. In 1926 he founded and served as an editor of a Marathi paper Tarun Bharat which was primarily the mouthpiece for the Congress Party.
Khare was a member of the Central Province Legislative Council. He resigned from the office in 1929. In 1930, he was imprisoned for his participation in the Civil Disobedience Movement. Khare served as an MLA of the Central Province for two terms (1935 to 1943).
Khare was the first Premier of the erstwhile State of Central Province and he occupied the office from 1937 to 1938. He started a Capital Punishment Relief Society for prisoners who were on death row for killing policemen during the Quit India movement in 1942.
He was in charge of the Commonwealth Relations Department while he served as a member in the Viceroy’s Executive Council. He became the Prime Minister for the erstwhile Alwar State in 1947 and is alleged to have pursued anti-muslim policies during his tenure.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Khare represented the Princely State of Alwar in the Constituent Assembly. He resigned from the Assembly in 1948.
Contributions Post-Independence
Khare joined the Hindu Mahasabha in 1949 and served as its President (1949 to 1951). Later, in 1954, he served as the Vice-President of the All-India Hindu Mahasabha.
He passed away in 1970 at Nagpur.
Key Writings
Some of Khare’s wiritng include: My Defence, Speeches and Statements of Dr. N. B. Khare, Biography in Marathi—Vol. I, published in 1943 and Vol. II in 1950.


 



Key Speeches


During the debates on an Assembly rule about electing the Vice-Presidents of the Constituent Assembly, Khare moved a motion to ensure that one of the two Vice-Presidents was a representative of the Princely States.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















