






























Part III Archives - Constitution of India






















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII







 
Part III
Fundamental Rights
Part III of the Constitution contains the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to Indian citizens, and in some cases all persons. They are classified into six categories, also including the remedies in case they are violated.
Read More 


 





Articles 12 to 35





General




Article 12: Definitions


Article 13: Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights








Right to Equality




Article 14: Equality before law


Article 15: Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth


Article 16: Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment


Article 17: Abolition of Untouchability


Article 18: Abolition of titles








Right to Freedom




Article 19: Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of Speech, etc.


Article 20: Protection in respect of conviction for offences


Article 21: Protection of life and personal liberty


Article 21A: Right to education


Article 22: Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases








Right against Exploitation




Article 23: Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour


Article 24: Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.








Right to Freedom of Religion




Article 25: Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion


Article 26: Freedom to manage religious affairs


Article 27: Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion


Article 28: Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain educational institutions








Cultural and Educational Rights




Article 29: Protection of interests of minorities


Article 30: Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions








Right to Property




Article 31: Compulsory acquisition of property (Omitted)








Saving of Certain Laws




Article 31A: Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.


Article 31B: Validation of certain Acts and Regulations


Article 31C: Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles


Article 31D: Saving of laws in respect of anti-national activities (Omitted)








Right to Constitutional Remedies




Article 32: Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part


Article 32A: Constitutional validity of State laws not to be considered in proceedings under article 32 (Omitted)


Article 33: Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part in their application to Forces, etc.


Article 34: Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is in force in any area


Article 35: Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part





 
 



 
More About Part III: Fundamental Rights

Part III of the Constitution contains the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to Indian citizens, and in some cases all persons. They are classified into six categories, also including the remedies in case they are violated.




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















