






























U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 3 at TNNLU, Trichy (Session III and IV) - Constitution of India
























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 3 at TNNLU, Trichy (Session III and IV)


 

















 





Video




 




U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 3 at TNNLU, Trichy (Session III and IV)

November 13, 2021






The Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR) in collaboration with its partnered Indian and American universities organised a series of workshops on U.S.- India Comparative Constitutional law in October, November 2021 and January 2022. The partnered Indian and American law universities were paired for an interactive session.
On 13 and 14 November 2021, CLPR conducted the third virtual workshop of this series. This time around, our partner was the Tamil Nadu National Law University, Trichy (TNNLU). The workshop was structured around four sessions that would help students explore critical Constitutional Law issues grounded in a US-India comparative framework. It gave the students an opportunity to analyse, compare, and discuss in-depth issues related to personal liberty, freedom of choice, reproductive rights, and personal autonomy.
This video covers session III and IV of the third workshop. It was attended by over 50 students from various universities, including TNNLU, St. Joseph’s College of Law, Bengaluru, School of Law, Christ University, Bengaluru, Karnataka State Law University, Symbiosis International University, Hyderabad, and National Law University, Delhi. 10 other persons were present, including faculty members, U.S. Consulate staff, and the CLPR team. Due to COVID-19-related circumstances, the U.S. partner law university had to pull out of the workshop.
The Agendas for session III and IV are provided below:
3.00 pm – 4.30 pm – Session III: Reproductive Rights and Personal Autonomy (Abortion)
Part I
CLPR introduced the idea of personal autonomy in the context of reproductive rights, as well as the constitutional provisions and case law that governs abortion laws in the U.S. and India. Students compared the two constitutional regimes in an hour-long discussion.
Session Readings:

Excerpts from The Right to Privacy and Access to Abortion in a Post Puttaswamy World by Severyna Magill (University of Oxford Human Rights Hub Journal, 2020)
An Overview of Abortion Laws by Guttmacher Institute (2021)
Article 21 the Constitution of India, 1950 and Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States.

Presentation Slides: Session III Part I
Part II
The CLPR team introduced students to two important cases related to abortion rights: Suchita Srivastava & Anr. v Chandigarh Administration (2009) and Roe v Wade (1973). Students used these cases to engage in an activity: they were asked to determine if certain provisions of India’s Medical Termination of Pregnancy (Amendment) Act, 2021 and the U.S. Texas Abortion Law, SB8, 2021, would stand the test of constitutionality in the two countries. Through this activity the students were able to discern how the two countries viewed the agency of women to make reproductive choices.
Session Readings:

Excerpts from Suchita Srivastava & Anr. vs Chandigarh Administration (2009) 14 SCR 989
Excerpts from Roe v. Wade 410 US 113 (1973)

Presentation Slides: Session III Part II
***
9.00 am – 11.00 am – Session IV: Reflections, Feedback, Going Forward and Essay Competition
CLPR resource persons reviewed what was discussed in the preceding sessions and answered student questions. Students provided feedback on the sessions and then wrote their essays for the essay competition. The essay prompt was: ‘is studying U.S. constitutional history and practice useful in understanding contemporary Constitutional developments in India?’
Presentation Slides: Session IV
Speaker Remarks
The workshop closed with some final remarks from Dr. Vishnuprasad, Assistant Professor, TNNLU. His remarks touched upon the themes discussed in the workshop and and brought the workshop to a close.

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















