






























Article 58: Qualifications for election as President - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
58



Qualifications for election as President

(1) No person shall be eligible for election as President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India,
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.
(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor of any State or is a Minister either for the Union or for any State.



 
 

Version 1




Article 47, Draft Constitution of India 1948
(1) No person shall be eligible for election as President unless he-
(a) Is a citizen of India,
(b) Has completed the age of thirty-five years, and
(c) Is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.
(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds any office or position of emolument under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause a person shall not be deemed to hold any office or position of emolument by reason only that-
(a) He is a minister either for India or for any State for the time being specified in Part I of the First Schedule; or
(b) He is a minister for any State for the time being specified in Part III of the First Schedule, if he is responsible to the Legislature of the State, or, where there are two Houses of the Legislature of the State, to the Lower House of the Legislature, and if not less than three-fourths of the members of the Legislature or House, as the case may be, are elected.




Version 2


Article 58, Constitution of India 1950
(1) No person shall be eligible for election as President unless he —
(a) is a citizen of India,
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.
⁠(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments.
⁠Explanation. — For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh of any State or is a Minister either for the Union or for any State.




Summary


The Constituent Assembly debated Draft Article 47 on 27 December 1948 and 13 October 1949. The Draft Article lays down the required qualifications for an individual to be elected as the President of India.
A member wanted to ensure that a Minister who wanted to run for the President’s office first resigned from his current ministerial office. This, he reasoned, would avoid the misuse of the Minister’s office and staff for Presidential campaign. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee highlighted that this amendment would ‘create complete administrative chaos’. If Ministers were to resign, then all administrative responsibilities would come to a halt. It would not be feasible to delegate this role to bureaucrats or temporary Ministers. He further noted that the Election Commission, a constitutional body, would ensure fair elections and prevent any Minister from exercising undue influence.
There was an amendment which required President-elect to declare all ‘right, title, share, property and interest’ in any government-aided or supported enterprise, business or trade. Such assets were to be bought by the government. The amendment mover invoked German President Hindenberg’s involvement with the Prussian landlords which strengthened the Nazi government and strongly urged ‘that President should be free from any entanglements’. Some members opposed this proposal and argued that it would infringe the right to hold private property which was a recognised fundamental right. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee observed that the proposal was rather novel and unprecedented: he illustrated how even the American Constitution, which adopted a Presidential form of government, did not have a similar provision. Moreover, this amendment was unnecessary as the Indian Constitution viewed the position of the President as ‘a nominal figurehead’. If the Assembly were to adopt this, there would be a dearth of Presidential candidates.
All substantive amendments were rejected. On 27 December 1948, the Draft Article was adopted with a minor amendment. The Drafting Committee successfully moved another minor amendment on 13 October 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















