






























The Influence of Dewey's Ideas of Social Forces on B.R. Ambedkar - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										The Influence of Dewey’s Ideas of Social Forces on B.R. Ambedkar


 
















The Influence of Dewey’s Ideas of Social Forces on B.R. Ambedkar



Blog



Siddharth Jha






16 May 2023

Share









 
In recent times, we have seen an explosion of interest from scholars and writers in B.R. Ambedkar’s life. This is not only because of his continuing relevance to Indian society and politics, but also the remarkable diversity of his achievements, interests and influence.  
One such recent attempt is Scott Stroud’s The Evolution of Pragmatism in India, described as an intellectual biography of Ambedkar, which carefully explores the influence of philosopher John Dewey and his pragmatic philosophy on Ambedkar. During his studies in Columbia University from 1913-16, Ambedkar took two year-long courses under Dewey which had an everlasting impact on him. In a letter to his wife, he once described Dewey as a “wonderful man” who he owed his intellectual life to. 
While several scholars have noted this fact and the traces of Deweyan themes in Ambedkar’s philosophy, Stroud is the first to delve deep to deliver a detailed and textured account of Dewey’s influence on a young Ambedkar and his subsequent career. In this blog, we focus on one strand of this influence: Dewey’s ideas of social forces and the role of the individual in effecting social change. 
Dewey viewed society as a resultant of forces that push or pull in various directions. The customs and norms that define morality for a society exert a stabilising force on any deviant behaviour. In such a seemingly static situation, progress occurs through a conscious re-thinking of societal norms and a reconstruction of past tradition. Here, the individual can play a significant role as the innovating ‘force’ which initiates this reconstruction. 
Stroud posits that Ambedkar clearly saw himself as such an individual, with the intellectual capacity to initiate a change. The challenge before Ambedkar was, how to play the role of this innovating ‘force’ and initiate social change in a deeply hierarchical society. 
Stroud’s analysis of key texts such as Annihilation of Caste and speeches such as Ambedkar’s testimony before the Southborough Commission reveals how Ambedkar employed what he terms ‘reconstructive rhetoric’ in his political and social interventions. This involved carefully designing his speech or writing to speak to a particular audience, whether that of educated upper castes or ordinary working-class folk.  
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar receiving an honorary degree from Columbia Univeristy in 1952
The Constituent Assembly Debates also offer us a good example of Ambedkar’s skilful use of rhetoric, designed to provoke or inspire as the need be. While debating the federal structure of India, he castigated the village as “a den of ignorance, narrow mindedness and communalism.” This created a fierce uproar in the Assembly among the votaries of decentralisation, but ultimately the Constitution settled upon a two-tier federal structure. On another occasion, he referred to Article 32 as “the very soul of the Constitution and the very heart of it”, declaring it to be the most important article in the Constitution. 
In his final speech in the Assembly, he put forward the challenges to be faced in working the Constitution in no uncertain terms:  
“On the 26th of January 1950, we are going to enter into a life of contradictions. In politics we will have equality and in social and economic life we will have inequality… We must remove this contradiction at the earliest possible moment or else those who suffer from inequality will blow up the structure of political democracy which this Assembly has so laboriously built up.” 
Stroud’s work allows us to see these speeches as instances of reconstructive rhetoric crafted carefully to prod the Assembly towards desirable social goals.














Comments







  Scott Stroud 



								25 May 2023							




Thank you for the thoughtful write up. There’s so much to discover in terms of Ambedkar’s political thought. If readers in India want to read my book, there’s a cheaper HarperCollins India edition available in south Asia: https://www.amazon.in/dp/9356991103

Reply 









Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Why did B.R. Ambedkar Accept the Poona Pact?

19 December 2022
												• By Siddharth Jha

What were the reasons behind Ambedkar accepting the Poona Pact despite the lack of inclusion of separate electorates within its provisions?


 3 mins										




 

B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights

10 December 2021
												• By Meenakshi Ramkumar

B.R Ambedkar was faced with criticism from his Constituent Assembly colleagues: why were there restrictions on Fundamental Rights in the Draft Constitution?


 2 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















