






























This Month in Constitution-Making (February 1947): Britain Announces It Will Quit India - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										This Month in Constitution-Making (February 1947): Britain Announces It Will Quit India


 
















This Month in Constitution-Making (February 1947): Britain Announces It Will Quit India



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






09 February 2022

Share









 
On 20 February 1947, British Prime Minister C.R. Atlee made it official: Britain would leave India – and soon.
Speaking in the House of Commons, Atlee informed members that Britain would transfer power to Indians – specifically to authorities established by a Constitution ‘approved by all parties’. Atlee acknowledged that as it stood, such a Constitution was not on the horizon, as key political groups were absent from the Constituent Assembly. Whether this political conflict was resolved or not, Atlee seemed to suggest that Britain would leave India before June 1948, no matter what.
Two days after Atlee’s historic speech, Jawaharlal Nehru made a statement. He warned Indians that the imminent departure of the British ‘…will undoubtedly have far-reaching consequences and puts a burden and responsibility on all concerned’.
On Nehru’s mind was the uncertainty in India’s political landscape that primarily revolved around the Muslim League’s boycott of the Constituent Assembly. Nehru knew that if the Muslim League did not come on board, Britain would view the Constituent Assembly as lacking complete representation and insist on the partition of India. In what was implicitly a statement aimed at the Muslim League, he said ‘all those who kept aloof and we ask all to be partners in this joint and historic undertaking [constitution-making] casting aside fear and suspicion’.
Britain’s declaration of quitting India had put Indian leaders in a fix. To ensure that the British actually left, they had to draft and settle a Constitution quickly – which is what they resolved to do. But if they put constitution-making on full throttle, the chances of the Muslim League joining would be even slimmer. In any case, most Indian leaders had slowly resigned to the fact that the British would leave behind not one but two independent dominions.

Tags Indian Independence MovementIndian Constituent AssemblyClement AtleeMuslim League 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















