






























Article 80: Composition of the Council of States - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
80



Composition of the Council of States

(1) The Council of States shall consist of—
(a) twelve members to be nominated by the President in accordance with the provisions of clause (3); and
(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of the States and of the Union territories.
(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by representatives of the States and of the Union territories shall be in accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.
(3) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
Literature, science, art and social service.
(4) The representatives of each State in the Council of States shall be elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.
(5) The representatives of the Union territories in the Council of States shall be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.



 
 

Version 1




Article 67 (1) to (4), Draft Constitution 1948
(1) The Council of States shall consist of two hundred and fifty members of whom-
(a) Fifteen members shall be nominated by the President in the manner provided in clause (2) of this article; and
(b) The remainder shall be representatives of the States:
Provided that the total number of representatives of the States for the time being specified in Part III of the First Schedule shall not exceed forty per cent of this remainder.
(2) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of this article shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely,-
(a) Literature, art, science and education;
(b) Agriculture, fisheries and allied subjects;
(c) Engineering and architecture;
(d) Public administration and social services.
(3) The representatives of each State for the time being specified in Part I or Part III of the First Schedule in the Council of States shall-
(a) Where the Legislature of the State has two Houses, be elected by the elected members of the Lower House;
(b) Where the Legislature of the State has only one House, be elected by the elected members of that House; and
(c) Where there is no House of the Legislature for the State, be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.
(4) The representatives of the States for the time being specified in Part II of the First Schedule in the Council of States shall be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.




Version 2


Article 80, Constitution of India 1950
(1) The Council of States shall consist of—
(a) twelve members to be nominated by the President in accordance with the provisions of clause (3); and
(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of the States.
⁠(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by representatives of the States shall be in accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.
⁠(3) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
⁠Literature, science, art and social service.
⁠(4) The representatives of each State specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule in the Council of States shall be elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.
⁠(5) The representatives of the States specified in Part C of the First Schedule in the Council of States shall be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.




Summary


Draft Article 67 (1) to (4) (Article 80) was debated on 3 January and 17 October 1949. It laid down the composition of the Council of States.
A member moved an amendment to delete clause 2. He believed that members to the Parliament must only be elected, not nominated. Nominations adversely affect the ‘internal symmetry of the Legislative bodies’. Moreover, the categories of interests from where persons could be nominated were ‘not quite consistent intrinsically, logical or scientific’. Another member argued that indirect election or nomination should not find a place in the Constitution. If the intention behind clause 2 was to rope in talented and intelligent persons to the Councils, this could be achieved through regular elections as well. Alternatively, the House could set up a board of advisors with meritorious members to aid legislative business.
There was another proposal to constitute a ‘Consultative Council’ with representatives from various sectors including agriculture, industry, commerce etc. This Council would not have any administrative or executive powers. It would be entrusted with the responsibility of examining legislative proposals before being taken up by the Parliament. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee found this proposal to be unnecessary. He argued that as a matter of policy, the Government anyway consulted experts before introducing any law in the Parliament.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee moved an amendment to decrease the nominated members from 15 to 12. This was accepted, along with certain other amendments moved by the Drafting Committee, and the Draft Article was adopted on 4 January 1949. The Assembly accepted a few more amendments on 17 October 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















