






























Article 47: Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part IV

Article
47



Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health

The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health.



 
 

Version 1




Article 38, Draft Constitution of India 1948
The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties.




Version 2


Article 47, Constitution of India 1950
The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health.




Summary


Draft Article 38 (Article 47) was debated on 23 and 24 November 1948. It imposed an obligation on the state to improve public health, nutrition, and the standard of living.
A member moved to expand the scope of the Draft Article by inserting the sentence: ‘and shall endeavour to bring about the prohibition of the consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs which are injurious to health‘. Another member agreed with the spirit of the amendment, but proposed that the words ‘except for medicinal purposes‘ be included in the Draft Article.
The debates in the Assembly were based on these two amendments.
One member in favour of the amendment argued that it made economic sense, as the loss of revenue caused by the ‘increase of crime, disease and the loss of efficiency‘ was three times higher than the loss of revenue earned from the sale of alcohol. Another contended that working class and Dalit families would benefit the most from a ban, claiming that these communities spent a substantial amount of their wages on liquor.
However, another member offered several arguments against the adoption of the two amendments. He argued that similar prohibitions in both America and Madras had proven unsuccessful and expensive: many people continued to consume alcohol, while the state incurred extra costs to incarcerate those who broke the ban. Moreover, he contended that prohibition infringed on the personal liberty of citizens. A member from the Adivasi community argued that a ban on alcohol could be used to infringe the religious rights of Adivasis, citing the religious significance attached to the consumption of rice beer.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee responded to these arguments by reminding the Assembly that the article was a part of the non-justiciable Directive Principles of State Policy, and as such were not legally binding. With regard to the objection raised by the member from the Adivasi community, he noted that the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution guaranteed that no law could be enforced in tribal areas without consulting with District and Regional Tribal Boards.
The Assembly accepted both amendments, and the Draft Article was adopted on 24 November 1948.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















