






























Why Did Our Framers Defer the Uniform Civil Code? - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Why Did Our Framers Defer the Uniform Civil Code?


 
















Why Did Our Framers Defer the Uniform Civil Code?



Blog









04 July 2023

Share









 
									The seven-member Drafting Committee chaired by B.R. Ambedkar								

In what is being seen as a significant development towards a Uniform Civil Code (UCC) in India, the Union Government will present a UCC Bill in Parliament in the monsoon session. This has triggered the latest round of controversy and political tensions which have consistently punctuated India’s post-independence history around the UCC.
The positions taken on the UCC by political and civil society actors can be broadly categorized into three : those who completely oppose it, those who fully support it, and those who support the UCC albeit at an appropriate time and subject to some conditions.
Our Constitution framers belonged to the third category. They desired India to have a UCC, as evidenced by its inclusion in the Constitution, but chose to postpone its implementation for a later time. But why?
Article 35 of the Draft Constitution of India 1948 stated, ‘The State shall endeavor to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.’ On 23 November 1948, when this Draft Article was taken up for discussion in the Constituent Assembly, a series of amendments were moved by Muslim members aiming to effectively bury the article. Ismail Khan was the first to move an amendment and proposed that the UCC would not apply to a community that already had its personal religious laws. Broadly the attacks on the provisions argued that a UCC would violate their freedom of religion, would create disharmony and must not be implemented without the consent of religious communities.
Drafting Committee member K.M. Munshi emerged as the chief defender of the Draft Article. He argued that a UCC was important to uphold the unity of the country and the Constitution’s secular credentials. He reminded Muslim members that this provision would not only affect the Muslim community but also the Hindu community. Further, he emphasized that women’s rights could never be secured without a uniform civil code. The argument that it would violate religious freedom under the Constitution did not make sense to Munshi, as the Constitution allowed for social reform legislation to limit religious freedom.
Pursuing a middle ground, Drafting Committee Chairman B.R. Ambedkar reassured concerned Muslim members that the UCC would not interfere in their personal laws emphasising that it was part of the non-justiciable directive principles of state policy. He proposed that the future parliament could introduce a provision stating that the Code would only apply to those who voluntarily declared their willingness to abide by it.
A week later, during a debate in response to an amendment advocating for the fundamental right to exercise one’s personal law, influential Assembly member Ananthasayanam Ayyanagar reassured the house, stating, ‘There is absolutely nothing in this Constitution that allows the majority to override the minority.’ Ayyangar’s remarks reflected a significant anti-majoritarian perspective, emphasizing the need for cautious implementation of progressive reform provisions in the case of minorities. He emphasized the importance of actively involving minorities, avoiding any perception of a majoritarian agenda.
From the debates, it is evident that the implementation of the UCC was deferred to a later time due to the lack of consent and significant resistance from a particular community. The presence of a considerable power imbalance between the Hindu majority and the Muslim minority in India, and the fear of majoritarianism played a crucial role in the Framers’ decision of defer the UCC. What also surely occupied the minds of the framers was the partition and the precarious situation it placed the Muslim minority in. In such a context, our framers were clear that a UCC could only be implemented when there was a broad consensus, and all minority communities were on board.
The absence of such a consensus was precisely why the 12th Law Commission of India, in its report, recommended against implementing the UCC. However, disregarding these findings, the current government has once again brought the UCC back on the table with apparent renewed vigour. It would be wise for the government to approach the UCC while considering the principles laid out by our framers: obtaining adequate consent and refraining from using their numerical dominance in parliament to forcefully push the UCC into law.

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















