






























23 Dec 1946 Archives - Constitution of India




















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Debates
								 ≫ 
												Volume 1
								 ≫ 
										23 Dec 1946


 








View all volumes



X


Volume 1


Volume 2


Volume 3


Volume 4


Volume 5


Volume 6


Volume 7


Volume 8


Volume 9


Volume 10


Volume 11


Volume 12











CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES
Volume 1
23 Dec 1946




Hindi 


Kannada 




















 




Table of contents



										Adoption of Rule of Procedure									



										Election of Committees - Credentials Committee									



										Election of Committees - House Committee									



										Election of Committees - Finance and Staff Committee									



										President's Statement About Reference to Federal Court- The Statement of May 16 For Interpretation									
















The Assembly then met in Plenary Session at Thirty five minutes past One of the Clock, on Monday, the 23rd December, 1946, Mr. Chairman (The Hon’ble Dr. RajendraPrasad) in the Chair.










ADOPTION OF RULES OF PROCEDURE





1.11.1


								Ananthasayanam Ayyangar							


Sir, I beg to move….



















1.11.2


								Chairman							


The Committee stage is over. We are meeting in full House now. Mr. Munshi moves that the Rules as passed by the Committee be passed.



















1.11.3


								Ananthasayanam Ayyangar							


I would like to move that:
“Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Rules that we have passed all the proceedings till now taken in this Assembly shall be valid and regular.”



















1.11.4


								Ananthasayanam Ayyangar							


We have passed Rules and regulations for the conduct of elections, etc., for the appointment of officers and so on. Whatever we have done till now, whatever may be these Rules all that we have done, will be valid.



















1.11.5


								Chairman							


That will arise after the Rules have been passed.



















1.11.6


								K. M. Munshi							


I move that the Rules, as accepted by the Committee of the House, be now adopted by the Assembly in its plenary Session.



















1.11.7


								P. Subbarayan							


I second it.



















1.11.8


								Chairman							


I put the Rules to the House.
The Rules, as accepted by the Committee of the House, were adopted.



















1.11.9


								Ananthasayanam Ayyangar							


I beg to move, Sir, that —
   “Nothwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Rules as passed today, all proceedings taken by this Assembly till now, shall be deemed valid and proper and be binding.”



















1.11.10


								K. M. Munshi							


I submit all things that have been done by the House are by majority. The Rules have been adopted by a majority, and they come into force only on adoption. Therefore, whatever we have done before need not be validated.



















1.11.11


								Chairman							


I think it is unnecessary.



















1.11.12


								Chairman							


Now that we have passed the Rules, there are certain Committees which have to be elected under the Rules. Yesterday I announced that you may propose names for these Committees up to 1 o’clock today. We could not pass the Rules before 1 o’clock. It is already 1.35. I would give the Members time till 2 o’clock to make any nominations. They may be handed over to the Secretary.



















1.11.13


								Chairman							


We will meet at 4 o’clock for the purpose of holding elections and any other matter that may still have to be done.



















1.11.14


								Syamanandan Sahaya							


Some members may like to know when the next sitting of the Assembly will be.



















1.11.15


								Chairman							


That will be announced later.
The Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till 4 P.M.
The Assembly re-assembled after Lunch, at 4 of the Clock, Mr. President (The Hon’ble Dr. Rajendra Prasad) in the Chair.



















1.11.16


								Chairman							


As the meeting is now in open session after 2 days, I want to know if there are any members who have not signed the Register. If there are, they may kindly sign the Register now. I think there is none.
     ELECTION OF COMMITTEES
CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE



















1.11.17


								Chairman							


According to the Rules which we have not adopted there are certain Committees which have to be elected and I had fixed 2 o’clock as the time by which nominations for those Committees were to be put in. I will take now each of the Committees and say if we should have election. If we have got only as many names as are required, election will not be necessary. First, I take the Credentials Committee. There are five members to be elected to that Committee and the names which have been proposed are these-
Mr. Sarat Chandra Bose–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.
Dr. P.K. Sen–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.
Bakshi Sir Tek Chand–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.
Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar –proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.
Mr. F.R. Anthony–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.



















1.11.18


								Chairman							


These are the only 5 names which have been proposed. These nominations are valid. As there are only 5 names proposed, there is no need for election. These five are elected. (Cheers).
























HOUSE COMMITTEE





1.11.19


								Chairman							


Then the House Committee. Under the Rules, eleven members to be proposed, one for each of the eleven Provinces. These are the names proposed:-
Mr. Radhanath Das–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (from Bengal).     
Mr. Akshay Kumar Das–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (from Assam).     
Mr. Dip Narayan Sinha–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (From Bihar).     
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (From N.W. F.P.).     
Mr. Jairam Das Daulatram–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (from Sind).     
Mr. Nandakishore Das–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (from Orissa).     
Mr. Mohan Lal Saksena–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (from U.P.).     
Mr. H.V. Kamath–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (from C.P.).     
Mr. R.R. Diwakar–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (from Bombay)    
Srimati Ammu Swaminathan–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (from Madras).     
Pandit Shri Ram Sharma–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha (from Punjab).



















1.11.20


								Chairman							


These are the eleven names proposed for the Committee. As there is no contest, these are declared to be elected.
FINANCE AND STAFF COMMITTEE



















1.11.21


								Chairman							


Then we come to the Finance and Staff Committee. There are to be nine members but there are ten names proposed. I will read the names:
Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha–proposed by Mr. Kala Venkata Rao.    
Mr. Jaipal Singh–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.    
Mr. V.I. Muniswami Pillai–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.     
Mr. C.E. Gibbon–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.     
Mr. N.V. Gadgil–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.     
Seth Govind Das–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.     
Mr. Sri Prakasa–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.    
Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.     
Sardar Harnam Singh–proposed by Mr. Satyanarayan Sinha.    
Maharajadhiraja Bahadur Sir Uday Chand Mahtab of Burdwan–proposed by the Hon ‘ble Maharajadhiraja Sri Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga.



















1.11.22


								Chairman							


These ten names are proposed and there are nine seats. There may have to be election in this case.
(At this stage certain speeches were made which were ordered by the President, with the consent of the House, to be expunged.)
(The Maharajadhiraja of Burdwan withdrew his candidature)



















1.11.23


								Chairman							


The number of nominations being now equal to the number of Members of the Committee, I now declare the nine Members elected. (Cheers).
 
PRESIDENT’S STATEMENT ABOUT REFERENCE TO FEDERAL COURT-THE STATEMENT OF MAY 16 FOR INTERPRETATION.



















1.11.24


								Chairman							


There is one other matter that I must mention. I said on a previous occasion that we may have to consider the question of referring certain doubts and disputes with regard to the interpretation of the Statement to May 16, to the Federal Court. I have waited these days to get some motion or some suggestion from any member of the House to that effect. So far, no intimation of that kind to refer the matter to the Federal Court has been received. I take it that the wish of the House is that it is not necessary to refer that matter to the Federal Court. (Cheers) So, the question does arise now.



















1.11.25


								Chairman							


That brings us to the close of the business which we had to transact during this session of the Assembly. We shall now have to adjourn. Under the Rules which we have adopted, the President has no power to adjourn a session of the Assembly for more than three days. If he wants to adjourn the House for more than three days, the Assembly has the authority to do so. I suggest that the House do adjourn till the 20th January, 1947, at 11 A.M. If that is the wish of the House, you might indicate that.



















1.11.26


								Several Members							


Yes.



















1.11.27


								Chairman							


The House will now adjourn till 11 a.m. on the 20th January, 1947.
























The Assembly then adjourned till Eleven of the Clock, on Monday, the 20th January, 1947.



 








Previous


21 Dec 1946 | Volume 1

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















