






























Four More Teams Qualify, Stage is Set for ConQuest Grand Finale on 25 October - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Four More Teams Qualify, Stage is Set for ConQuest Grand Finale on 25 October


 



Quiz
Four More Teams Qualify, Stage is Set for ConQuest Grand Finale on 25 October
The Print team









										17 Oct										- 									
18 Oct

2020


Quiz



 Venue
Virtual


Share









The fifth edition of ConQuest, India’s premier national quiz on the Constitution, history, constitutional law and politics, is taking place online. The quiz is an initiative by the Centre for Law & Policy Research (CLPR).
The remaining two rounds of the total four knockout rounds were conducted on 17 and 18 October. Of the 16 participating teams, four teams — Delhi University’s Ramjas College, National Law School of India University Bangalore, Government Law College Mumbai and National Institute of Technology Jamshedpur — qualified for the grand finale to be held on 25 October.
More than 180 three-member teams from across disciplines had participated in the preliminary rounds held on 3-4 October.
A mixed bag of questions
The knockouts were structured into three rounds — ‘Potpourri’, ‘List It!’ and ‘Kahoot’, with the latter two focusing on multiple-choice questions.
In ‘Potpourri’, participants were asked questions from various topics using different formats. Teams were shown a picture of an institute and asked about its contribution to the making of India’s Constitution. It was a photograph of the Handmade Paper Institute Pune, which provided handmade paper for the original copy of the Indian Constitution. In another question, the logo of a theosophical society, a photograph of spiritual leader Jiddu Krishnamurti and a logo of the match girls’ strike — an industrial protest led by women and girls in London in 1888 — was displayed, and teams had to find the connection among them.
The connection was British socialist and activist Annie Besant, who was an active member of the theosophical society, had participated in the match girls’ strike, and had adopted Krishnamurti.
In ‘List It!’, teams were shown a grid of nine answers to a question, six of which were correct. They had to pick the right answers in under a minute — 500 points were given for every correct pick and zero points if even one was wrong.
One team was asked which countries allowed dual citizenship. School of Law Christ University Bengaluru chose Australia, Brazil and Japan. But Japan was an incorrect answer.
In the third round, all the teams stumbled when asked which nine-letter word was derived from the Latin word for white-robed — the answer to which was ‘candidate’. No one could answer the question.
Seven out of eight teams answered correctly when asked the title of a book on sedition that punned on an event from the 1930s. The answer was ‘The Great Repression’.
The winners
The 16 teams that participated in the third and fourth knockout rounds were National Law University, Odisha; Jogesh Chandra Chaudhuri Law College, Kolkata; Delhi School of Journalism; Delhi University’s Ramjas College and Sri Venkateswara College; Indian Law Society’s Law College, Pune; National Law Institute University, Bhopal; National Law School of India University, Bengaluru; School of Law Christ University, Bengaluru; Indian Institute of Technology, Madras; National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur; Dr Ram Manohar Lohia National Law University, Lucknow; Government Law College, Mumbai and Kirit P. Mehta School of Law, Mumbai.
In the third knockout round, Ramjas College with 13,521 points and NLSIU Bengaluru with 12,794 points qualified for the finals.
In the fourth knockout round, Government Law College Mumbai with 14,758 and NIT Jamshedpur with 14,234 points claimed spots in the Grand Finale.


This article first appeared in ThePrint.



Suggested Reading


Desk Brief: The 25th Amendment



B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights



B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights






More in events





 Quiz



Mumbai’s Government Law College wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2020
 Virtual



Event Report


25 Oct
2020







 Quiz



Knockout Rounds of Fifth Edition of ConQuest Begin, Four Teams Qualify for Grand Finale
 Virtual



Event Report


10 Oct
2020


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















