






























H. C. Mookherjee - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										H. C. Mookherjee


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
H. C. Mookherjee
1877 - 1956




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Christian
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Chairman: 
Sub-Committee on Minorities 
Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Minorities+1 moreProvincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Harendra Coomar Mookherjee was born in Calcutta on 3 October 1877. He was educated at Ripon College and Presidency College, both in Calcutta. He served as a Professor of English at City College, Calcutta from 1898 to 1914. Later, he served in the University of Calcutta in many capacities: as a Lecturer, Secretary, Council of Post-Graduate Teaching in Arts, Inspector of Colleges, University Professor of English, and as the head of the English Department from 1937-42. Mookherjee went on to become the Vice-Chancellor of the University.
He was the President of various teacher’s associations and a member of the Bengal Legislative Council (later Assembly) from 1937 to 1942.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
He was a prominent Bengali Christian leader and was elected as the President of the All India Council of Indian Christians. He was also a member of the Indian National Congress where he represented the interests of the Bengali Christian Community.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Along with V.T. Krishnamachari, Mookherjee was unanimously nominated as the Vice-President of the Assembly. He made interventions in debates relating to reservation for backward communities.
Later Contributions
Mookherjee was appointed as the Governor of Bengal from 1951 to 1956, while simultaneously serving as President of Desh Bandhu Memorial Society from 1953.
He passed away from a heart attack on 8 August 1956.
Key Writings
Mookherjee was a prolific writer, and wrote on a number of subjects. Some of his writings were Congress and the masses, Indians in British Industries, Why Prohibition?, and Some non-political achievements of the Congress.


 



Key Speeches



Mookherjee argued that reservation for backward communities in the legislature should be subject to a ten-year time limit. He famously gave up reservations on behalf of the Christian community.



 



Resources



Harendra Coomar Mukerjee, by Padmini Sengupta (National Book Trust, 1977)
Who’s Who 1950, (Parliament of India, 1950)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















