






























Committee on the Rules of Procedure - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 







Home
								 ≫ 
												Committees
								 ≫ 
										Committee on the Rules of Procedure


 






Constitution Making 
Committees

Committee on the Rules of Procedure




















It laid out the rules of procedure of the Constituent Assembly, including that of its various sections and committees. 


 





Members




 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





										Rajendra Prasad (Chairperson), 										
										Jagjivan Ram, 										
										Sarat Chandra Bose, 										
										Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar, 										
										Bakshi Tek Chand, 										
										Rafi Ahmed Kidwai, 										
										G. Durgabai, 										
										N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar, 										
										Purushottam Das Tandon, 										
										K. M. Munshi, 										
										B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, 										
										Frank Anthony, 										
										Gopinath Bordoloi 



Meeting DatesDecember 10, 1946December 20, 1946 


 




Background


On 10 December 1946, the Constituent Assembly adopted a resolution appointing the Committee on the Rules of Procedure upon a motion by J.B. Kripalani. The committee was responsible for framing all the rules of the Constituent Assembly, including those for admission and resignation of members, conduct of business in the Assembly and its various committees, and fixing salaries and allowances of all persons involved in the Assembly’s functioning. Importantly, the Assembly resolved that the committee would be responsible for framing rules for other sections and committees of the Assembly to establish that the Assembly was “one and indivisible” and that other committees or sections could not function independently of the Constituent Assembly rules.
According to Granville Austin, the power and authority of the Constituent Assembly was embodied in these rules set by the Committee. The rules clearly stated that “The Assembly shall not be dissolved except by a resolution assented to by at least two-thirds of the whole number of members of the Assembly.” This meant that the British had no authority to dissolve the Assembly except by the use of force.




Work Summary


After the appointment of the committee on 10 December 1946, it remains unclear how many meetings were held to deliberate and prepare its report. The elections for the committee were conducted on 11 December 1946, with only 15 members submitting their nominations. Therefore, the Constituent Assembly considered ballot elections unnecessary and declared all 15 members elected to the committee.
On 20 December 1946, Rajendra Prasad, the Chairman of the Committee, presented the report to the Assembly. Although the rules drafted by the Committee were adopted by the Assembly following a two-day discussion, they were periodically revised by the Assembly until June 1949.




Key documents 


Report of the Rules of Procedure Committee




Resources



The Framing of India’s Constitution 1966, Vol. 1 by Shiva Rao
Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation by Granville Austin




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















