






























B. Pocker Sahib Bahadur - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										B. Pocker Sahib Bahadur


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
B. Pocker Sahib Bahadur
1890 - 1965




Key Information

Party: All-India Muslim League
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Malayalam
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
B. Pocker Sahib Bahadur was born in 1890. He graduated from Madras Law College in 1915 and enrolled himself as an advocate at the Madras High Court in 1917.
Pocker Sahib’s political career began in 1919, when he submitted a memorandum to Lord Montagu regarding special constituencies for Muslims. The reforms proposed by Lord Montagu formed the basis of the Government of India Act, 1919.
He was a leader of the Khilafat struggle in India, and led the relief efforts for people affected by the Mapilla revolt of 1921. He also worked towards empowering Mapillas from the Malabar region through the South Indian Muslim Education Society.
From 1930-1936, Pocker served as the Parliament Party Secretary of the United Nationalist Party in Madras. He later joined the Muslim League.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Pocker was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras on a Muslim League ticket. He was one of 28 members of the Muslim League who chose to remain in India after partition. In the Assembly, he intervened on a number of debates including on the Uniform Civil Code, liquor ban, and separate electorates.
Later Contributions
Unlike other Muslim League members who joined the Indian Union Muslim League after partition, Pocker remained with the former. He won election to the Lok Sabha in 1952 on a Madras Muslim League ticket. In 1957 he was elected again as an independent candidate from Manjeri constituency. As an MP, he spearheaded the effort to exempt Muslims from the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
Pocker was also one of the founding members of the Kerala Muslim Educational Association in 1958.
He passed away on 29th July 1965.


 



Key Speeches



Pocker Sahib advocated for English to be the official language of the Union along with Hindustani.
During the debates on the Directive Principles of State Policy, he spoke in favour of the prohibition of liquor. He also opposed the proposal for the Uniform Civil Code, stating that each community had the right to follow their personal laws regarding marriage, inheritance, divorce, etc.
He made a case for separate electorates to protect the rights of minorities, as reservations were not a viable option.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















