






























Report of the Committee on Chief Commissioner's Provinces Archives - Constitution of India






















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Committee Reports
								 ≫ 
										Report of the Committee on Chief Commissioner's Provinces


 





COMMITTEE REPORTS
Report of the Committee on Chief Commissioner's Provinces
21 October 1947
 



Remarks


The Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces was set up by the Constituent Assembly on 31 July 1947 to determine the administrative future of the Chief Commissioner’s Provinces in Independent India. Under British rule, these Provinces were directly controlled by the Governor General and had almost no form of representative government. The Committee had to suggest suitable constitutional changes to define the future administration of these Provinces and decide whether they would continue to be centrally administered.
The seven member Committee, chaired by Pattabhi Sitaramayya, submitted its Report to the President of the Constituent Assembly on 21 October 1947. Due to its late submission, the Report was not discussed by the Assembly prior to publishing the 1948 Draft Constitution. It was only on 4 November 1948 that B.R. Ambedkar tabled the Report in the Assembly.
The Report contained recommendations for administration of the five previously centrally administered Provinces— Panth Piploda, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Coorg, Ajmer-Merwara and Delhi. Significantly, as per the Report, the latter three would exist as ‘Lieutenant Governors’ Provinces‘ post independence, with an elected legislature like all other States. But unlike other States, the Central Legislature and the President would have a considerable amount of power over legislation in these Provinces. The recommendations of the Report went through several changes both in the Drafting Committee and later in the Assembly.




 







LIEUTENANT GOVERNORS’ PROVINCES




CR.CCP.1


1. Delhi, Ajmer-Merwara including Panth Piploda, Coorg and such other provinces as may be so designated shall be Lieutenant Governors’ Provinces.




















THE PROVINCIAL EXECUTIVE




CR.CCP.2


2. In each province there shall be a Lieutenant Governor who shall be appointed by the President of the Federation.


















CR.CCP.3


3. The provisions of the Constitution Act relating to the term of office, qualifications for appointment, eligibility for re-appointment, conditions of office, declaration before entering office by the Governor shall as far as possible be applicable in the case of the Lieutenant Governor. He may be removed from office by the President on grounds upon which a Governor may be impeached.


















CR.CCP.4


4. (i) The executive authority of the province shall be vested in the Lieutenant Governor and may be exercised by him either directly or through persons acting under his authority.
(ii) The power to suspend, remit or to commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence shall be vested in the Lieutenant Governor as in the case of major provinces.
(iii) Nothing in this section shall prevent the President of the Federation or the provincial legislature from delegating functions to subordinate authorities.




















ADMINISTRATION OF PROVINCIAL AFFAIRS




 CR.CCP.5


5. (i) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of his functions except in so far as he is by or under this Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion. The number of Ministers shall not exceed three except with the approval of the President of the Federation.
(ii) In case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers on any issue which he considers important he may refer the matter to the President of the Federation, whose decision shall be final and binding upon the province.


















CR.CCP.6


6. The provisions of the Constitution Act relating to the appointment, dismissal and with respect to the determination of the salaries of the Ministers in the Governors’ provinces shall, as far as possible, be applicable in the case of Lieutenant Governors’ provinces.




















LEGISLATURE




CR.CCP.7


7. There shall for each of the Lieutenant Governor’s province be a legislature, consisting of a single chamber to be known as the Legislative Assembly. It shall be composed of members chosen by direct election.


















CR.CCP.8


8. The term of office of the elected members of the Assembly, the basis of franchise and other general provisions shall be on the lines as provided in the Constitution Act for Governors’ provinces except that the representation of the different territorial constituencies in the Assembly shall be on a scale of not more than one representative for every 5,000 persons subject to a maximum of 33 for Coorg, 15,000 subject to a maximum of 40 in the case of Ajmer-Merwara including Panth Piploda and 20,000 subject to a maximum of 50 in the case of Delhi.


















CR.CCP.9


9. The provincial Assembly shall not have the power to make laws for Federal subjects; and the subjects included in both the provincial and concurrent lists in the new Constitution, will be treated as concurrent in respect of these minor provinces. Laws made by the Federal legislature for these provinces in respect of any of these subjects shall prevail over laws passed by the provincial Assembly in so far as the latter are inconsistent with the Federal laws.


















CR.CCP.10


10. Laws passed by the provincial Assembly shall require the assent of the President of the Federation.


















CR.CCP.11


11. The provisions of the Constitution Act relating to prorogation and dissolution of the legislature, the right of the Governor to address and send messages, election of members as officers of the legislature and fixation of their salaries in Governors’ provinces shall apply mutatis mutandis in the case of Lieutenant Governors’ provinces.


















CR.CCP.12


12. The provisions of the Constitution Act relating to the making of declaration by members, vacation of seats, disqualification of members, their privileges and immunities, salaries and allowances, in the provincial legislatures shall as far as possible be applicable in the Lieutenant Governors’ provinces.


















CR.CCP.13


13. The provisions of the Constitution Act relating to language to be used in the provincial legislature shall as far as possible be applicable in the case of these provinces.




















ADMINISTRATIVE BREAKDOWN




CR.CCP.14


14. If at any time the President of the Federation is satisfied that the government of the province cannot be carried on in accordance with these provisions, he should have power to supersede these arrangements, take the administration into his own hands and make such other provision for conducting it as he may consider necessary. The exercise of this power will be subject to the usual provisions relating to report to and control by the Federal legislature in the case of emergencies in a Governor’s province.




















JUDICIARY




CR.CCP.15


15. (i) In the case of Coorg, the powers of a High Court shall be exercised by the Madras High Court.
(ii) For Delhi and Ajmer-Merwara there shall be a High Court established in Delhi having original as well as appellate jurisdiction over both the provinces. The constitution of this High Court, the appointment of judges and their salaries, its jurisdiction and administrative functions shall be governed by the provisions of the Constitution Act applicable to the High Courts.




















PROVINCIAL SERVICES




CR.CCP.16


16. (i) For higher appointments provision shall be made in the recruitment of All India Administrative Services for meeting the requirements of these three provinces.
(ii) Provision shall be made for transfers inter se of service personnel recruited in the above manner in these three provinces.




















REPRESENTATION IN THE FEDERAL LEGISLATURE




CR.CCP.17


17. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Union Constitution regarding the basis of representation for the Houses of Federal legislature, each of these three minor provinces should be treated as a unit of the Federation for purposes of representation in the two Houses of a Federal legislature.




















CHIEF COMMISSIONERS’ PROVINCES




CR.CCP.18


18. (i) The Andaman and Nicobar Islands and such other areas as may be so designated shall be the Chief Commissioners’ provinces.
(ii) The Andaman and Nicobar Islands shall continue to be administered as at present with such adjustments in the administrative machinery as may be deemed necessary.

















 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















