






























Ajit Prasad Jain - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Ajit Prasad Jain


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Ajit Prasad Jain
1902 - 1977




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: 
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Ajit Prasad Jain was born on 6 October 1902 in Meerut, Uttar Pradesh. He completed his education at Lucknow University and received his law degree. After entering politics, he soon joined the Congress party and was a long time member of the All Indian Congress Committee. He served as a Member of the U.P. Legislative Assembly (1937-1947) and Parliamentary Secretary to the UP government (1937-19 39).
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Jain’s interest in the Indian freedom struggle grew during his transition from legal practice to politics. He participated in the Civil Disobedience Movement in 1930.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Jain was elected to the Constituent Assembly from United Provinces through a Congress Party ticket. His interventions in the Assembly touched on issues of equality, emergency provisons and presidential elections.
Later Contributions
Jain was a Member of India’s Provisional Parliament and the First (1952-1957), Second (1957-1962) and Third Lok Sabhas. He was the Union Minister of Rehabilitation (1950- 1954); Minister of Food and Agriculture (1954 – 1956; 1957 – 1959) and became the President of the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee in 1961. He served as the Governor of Kerala (1965-1966). While occupying this constitutional non-partisan position he pushed for Indira Gandhi to become India’s Prime Minister, thereby creating controversy.
Jain later became the Chairman of the Irrigation Commission. The Commission’s 1972 report identified key challenges that faced India’s irrigation system and is considered an important contribution to Indian agriculture studies.   
He died on 2 January 1977 in New Delhi
Key Writings
Jain authored a book titled ‘Kashmir’ in 1972 and also published ‘Shadow of the Bear: The Indo Soviet Treaty’ (1971). He wrote a memoir on the life of  ‘Rafai Ahmed Kidwai’ that was published in 2009. 


 



Key Speeches



He wanted the power to declare an emergency to be vested with the legislature and not the executive.
Jain supported Nehru’s proposal of electing the President of India through an electoral college. 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















