






























How A 1933 U.S. Law Shaped India’s Financial Emergency Provision - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										How A 1933 U.S. Law Shaped India’s Financial Emergency Provision


 
















How A 1933 U.S. Law Shaped India’s Financial Emergency Provision



Blog



Vineeth Krishna
									 and 									Kalyani Menon






25 February 2022

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

In 1933, during a catastrophic global economic crisis, Franklin Roosevelt became the United States President. The Great Depression was battering the U.S. economy which was reeling under mass unemployment, poverty, homelessness and industrial stagnation. To mitigate the situation, Roosevelt signed the National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933 (NIRA). It gave the President extraordinary powers to intervene in the industrial sector by regulating wages and prices.
In 1935, the validity of the Act was challenged in the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court held that the Act violated federalism and that extraordinary situations did not justify the widening of the U.S. President’s powers.
15 years later, B.R. Ambedkar would criticize the Court’s decision. Speaking in the Constituent Assembly on 16 October 1949, Ambedkar said that the U.S. Supreme Court had rendered Roosevelt toothless to take on the economic crisis. It was this historical example that Ambedkar used to justify his proposal to include Draft 290-A (Article 360, Constitution of India 1950) in the Constitution. The Draft Article gave the President the power to declare a financial emergency and partly suspend India’s federal structure if he or she believed that India’s financial stability was being threatened.
Most Assembly members weren’t having Ambedkar’s argument. On lines similar to which the U.S. Supreme Court had struck down NIRA, Assembly members felt that the Draft Article gave the President too much power and undermined federalism.
It was left to Ambedkar’s Drafting Committee colleague K.M. Munshi to reassure these members that the Draft Article gave the President extraordinary powers for only a limited period of time and such powers were critical to deal with a financial crisis.
At the end of the debate, the Assembly adopted the Draft Article without amendment.

Tags Indian Constituent AssemblyAmerican ConstitutionFranklin D. Roosevelt 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















