






























U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 4 at NLSIU, Bangalore (Session II) - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 4 at NLSIU, Bangalore (Session II)


 

















 





Video




 




U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 4 at NLSIU, Bangalore (Session II)

January 20, 2022






The Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR) in collaboration with its partnered Indian and American universities organised a series of workshops on U.S.- India Comparative Constitutional law in October, November 2021 and January 2022. The partnered Indian and American law universities were paired for an interactive session.
CLPR conducted the final workshop of the U.S.-India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 series between January 18th and 21st, 2022 with the students of National Law School of India University, Bengaluru. An absorbing interactive session with the students of Tulane University School of Law, our U.S. based partner university, was part of the final day of the workshop. Over 30 students from both universities participated in the workshop. They were joined by faculty members from the two universities, U.S. Consulate staff, and members of the CLPR team.
The CLPR team built the workshop around three sessions that explored the federal distribution of power within a U.S.-India comparative constitutional framework. It gave the students an opportunity to think about critical Constitutional Law issues and engage in a vibrant discussion from the U.S. and Indian contexts. This video covers session II of the workshop.
The Agenda for session II is provided below:
11.45 am – 1:45 pm – Session II: Federal Distribution of Legislative Powers
Part I
The second session concerned the federal distribution of legislative powers in the U.S. and India. Students engaged with constitutional provisions on legislative powers in both the U.S. and India. A presentation further compared the federal balance of legislative powers in the two countries. The discussion that followed the presentation allowed the students to appreciate the reasons for the varying federal distribution of legislative powers in the two countries.
Session Readings:

Article 245, 246, 248, 254 of the Constitution of India, 1950 and Article I, Section 8 and 10th Amendment of the Constitution of the United States
Common Interpretation on ‘Article I, Sec. 8: Federalism and the Overall Scope of Federal Power’ and ‘Necessary and Proper Clause’, constitutioncentre.org
Excerpts from ‘Federalism – Constitutional Law of India’, by HM Seervai (4th Ed Vol 1 2015)
‘Federalism, Economy, and Welfare in India: Historical Antecedents of Centralism’, Louise Tillin, India in Transition, (Center for the Advanced Study of India (CASI), University of Pennsylvania)

Presentation Slides: Session II Part I
Part II
Part II started with a CLPR presentation on how the judiciary in both jurisdiction have decided cases involving conflict between Union and State legislative powers. The cases were NFIB v Sebelius, 2012 (U.S.) and Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v State of Bihar and Ors., 1983 (India). Students were introduced to the judicial doctrines of ‘Necessary and Proper Clause’ used in America, and the ‘Pith and Substance’ and ‘Incidental and Ancillary Clause’ doctrines used in India.
The students participated in an activity in which they applied the above doctrines to a hypothetical case. This helped them better understand the similarities and differences between the doctrines used in India and the U.S.
Session Readings:

National Federal of Independent Business et al. v. Sebelius, Summary from Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, (567 U.S. 519 2012)
Excerpts from Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State Of Bihar (1983 AIR 1019)

Presentation Slides: Session II Part II
Speaker Remarks
Professor Louise Tillin, Professor of Politics, King’s College London asked students to consider if the common view that India had a ‘quasi-federal’ structure was true. She suggested that the India’s federal system must be considered as a strand of federalism and not as ‘quasi’ federalism.

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















