






























P. T. Chacko - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										P. T. Chacko


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
P. T. Chacko
1915 - 1964




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Travancore-Cochin
Religion: Christian
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Malayalam
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
A Congress party stalwart in Kerala and respected statesman, P.T. Chacko was born on 9 April 1915 at Chirakadavu, Kerala. He graduated from St. Joseph’s College, Trichy and went on to complete his law degree at the Law College, Trivandrum.
Chacko, though a lawyer by profession, gave up his lucrative legal practice to participate in the Indian independence movement. His participation in public life took many forms such as student activism, electoral politics and political activism.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Chacko became involved in the Indian independence movement in 1938. He fought vehemently for self-governance in the princely state of Travancore as a student leader during this period.
His political activism and involvement in the Indian independence movement resulted in his imprisonment on 5 occasions.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Chacko was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Travancore-Cochin Province in 1949 on a Congress Party ticket. In the Assembly, he spoke on tax laws and the official language issue.
Later Contributions
Chacko played a very important role in Kerala politics after 1950. A popular leader among the masses in Kerala, he was addressed as ‘Chackochen’. Chacko was a member of the Travancore Legislative Assembly (1948 to 1949) and subsequently the Travancore-Cochin Legislative Assembly (1949 to 1952) when Travancore and Cochin merged.
He was a member of the Rajya Sabha (1952 to 1953).
Chacko was elected to the first (1957) and second (1960) Kerala Legislative Assembly and. He held the ministries of Home Affairs, Law, and Revenue in Kerala (1960 to 1964). In 1962, he established India’s first open prison in Nettukaltheri near Neyyar, Trivandrum.
During his time as a legislator, he advocated for protection of civil rights, minority rights and right to education.
After a long and illustrious political life, Chacko passed away on 31 July 1964.
Key Writings
Chacko authored a book titled ‘Manuṣyanṛe vidyābhyāsaṃ’ in Malayalam in 1964.


 



Key Speeches



While discussing powers of the Union government to impose taxes on State governments, Chacko argued that all the properties and income of a State should be exempt from tax. He felt that taxation by the Union government would hamper the progress of the State.
When the Munshi-Ayyangar formula to decide India’s official language was proposed, he raised various concerns. First, he questioned whether India must have only one official language instead of multiple official languages. Second, he accepted Hindi as the official language but with apprehensions that Hindi-speaking regions would have an advantage over non-Hindi speaking regions. Third, he also remarked that the official language issue was not an urgent matter, and it could be settled in the future by Parliament- especially since the Assembly has accepted to use English for a period of 15 years as the official language.



 



Resources


Kerala Niyamasabha – P. T. Chacko


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















