






























Jwala Prasad Srivastava - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Jwala Prasad Srivastava


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Jwala Prasad Srivastava
1889 - 1954




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Jwala Prasad Srivastava was born on 16 August 1889 as the eldest son in a wealthy landowning family in the Basti District of present-day Uttar Pradesh. His father, Raja Janaki Prasad, was Basti’s tax-collector under the British and led an extravagant life. Janaki Prasad was particular that his sons receive the finest education in all aspects of life. Predictably, as the eldest, Srivastava’s childhood was carved along these lines. The lavishness of his growing up years is captured in his daughter, Shakuntala Masani’s description, that Srivastava ‘went to school on an elephant in full regalia’.
His initial schooling was completed in Basti at a local school under a Munshi. But Srivastava showed immense potential that urged the family to send him to Kanpur for a well-rounded education in an English-medium school. After school, he joined Kanpur’s Christ Church College for a Bachelor’s degree in science. Soon after graduation, his father insisted that Srivastava marry and move to England for a training in cotton textiles. Consequently, at the tender age of 16, Srivastava was married to a 14-year-old Kailash and together they were sent to England in the early 1900s.
Srivastava excelled in England academically. He first took a degree in Commerce and Science from the Manchester College of Technology and then stacked up numerous diplomas in the fields of textiles and sciences. After a few successful years in England, he returned with his family to India to care for his sick father.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
On his return to India, Srivastava began working for the government of United Provinces as an industrial chemist. Soon he established himself as Kanpur’s leading industrialist, going from owning dyeing plants to textile mills and eventually owning numerous other thriving businesses across the United Provinces. These included the New Victoria Mills in Kanpur, Raza Textile Mills in Rampur and similar ventures in Gwalior and Bhopal.
Srivastava was a British loyalist and was ideologically close to the Hindu Right. In Craig Baxter’s biography of the Jana Sangh, Srivastava is identified as part of the Hindu Mahasabha’s new leadership in the 1930s that enabled the Mahasabha’s break from Congress and its subsequent growth into an independent organisation.
His allegiance to the British also kept him away from much of the nationalist politics in the 1930s. Instead of boycotting the imperial legislatures, he believed in the incremental reforms introduced by the British that transferred powers to institutions elected with limited franchise.
In line with this belief, Srivastava worked for both the provincial and imperial governments in multiple roles. He represented the Upper India Chamber of Commerce in the provincial Legislative Council between 1926-36. He was made chairman of the United Provinces Simon Committee in 1928. He also held the post of Minister for Education (1931-37), and the Minister for Finance and Industries (1937) in the United Provinces government under Governor Lord Hailey. During this tenure, an attempt was made on his life by a disgruntled voter who had felt he had been unfairly lathi charged during a rally.
In the 1940s, he served as the food member in Viceroy Wavell’s Executive Council, holding this crucial administrative position during the Great Bengal famine of 1943-44.
He was conferred knighthood by the British in 1934.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Srivastava was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress Party ticket. He did not speak at all during the Constituent Assembly Debates.
Later Contributions
Not much is known of Srivastava’s life after India’s independence. He passed away on 16 December 1954.


 



Resources



The Indian Year Book 1939-40 Vol. XXVI edited by Francis Low (Bennett, Coleman & Co., Bombay, 1939)
And All is Said: Memoir of a Home Divided by Zareer Masani (Penguin India, 2012)
Goras and Desis: Managing Agencies and the Making of Corporate India by Omkar Goswami (Penguin India, 2016)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















