






























R. K. Sidhwa - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										R. K. Sidhwa


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
R. K. Sidhwa
1882 - 1957




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Central Provinces and Berar
Religion: Parsi
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Sindhi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Minorities 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Rustom K Sidhwa was born to a Parsi family in Karachi in 1882. He was a clerk in the Post Office in Karachi, and then became the president of the Sind and Baluchistan Postmen’s Union in the early 1900s.
Sidhwa was a lifelong member of the INC, and ran several elections on a Congress ticket. In 1932, he was the General Secretary of the 45th Indian National Congress, alongside his colleague Dr. Tarachand Lalwani.
He later served as the Mayor of Karachi from 1939-40.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
He was an active participant in local politics, although he was not directly involved in the freedom struggle.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Sidhwa was elected to the Constituent Assembly on a Congress ticket from the Central Provinces & Berar. In the Constituent Assembly, he represented the minority Parsi community and its interests. This was reflected by his participation in the debates regarding minority rights, linguistic debates, and the role of religion in public life.
Later Contributions
Sidhwa continued to be an active and vocal member of the Parsi community, and a defender of minority rights. He also remained in the INC, where he was involved in some inter-party committees and investigatory bodies, and was also a member of the Parsi Rajkiya Mandal. In 1956, he became the President of the All India Federation of Local Authorities, where he conducted detailed research into the economic life of India post-independence, and the impact of the government’s socialist policy on rural development.
Sidhwa died on 28th December, 1957.
Rustom Sidhwa Marg in Bombay, which is home to the Parsi Fire Temple, is named in his honour.
Key Writings
Sidhwa’s writing was mostly academic, economic, or political in nature. Alongside Dr. Tarachand Lalwani, he authored the 1932 Report of the 45th Indian National Congress.
In his capacity as the President of the All India Federation of Local Authorities, Sidhwa wrote and published a comprehensive report on labour, employment, and standards of living in under-developed countries, with a specific focus on India’s socialist policy.


 



Key Speeches



Sidhwa made a speech regarding Jinnah’s demand for Partition, speaking as a member of a minority community. In this speech, he suggested that this was another tactic in British ‘divide and conquer’ strategy.
He also gave another speech about the state and its role in education. He urged the Assembly to ensure secular education, particularly in those institutions that received aid from the State. In this speech, he also discussed the importance of accounting and providing for linguistic sub-groups around the country, and ensuring that all children could learn in their mother tongues.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















