






























U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 3 at TNNLU, Trichy (Session I and II) - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 3 at TNNLU, Trichy (Session I and II)


 

















 





Video




 




U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 3 at TNNLU, Trichy (Session I and II)

November 13, 2021






The Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR) in collaboration with its partnered Indian and American universities organised a series of workshops on U.S.- India Comparative Constitutional law in October, November 2021 and January 2022. The partnered Indian and American law universities were paired for an interactive session.
On 13 and 14 November 2021, CLPR conducted the third virtual workshop of this series. This time around, our partner was the Tamil Nadu National Law University, Trichy (TNNLU). The workshop was structured around four sessions that would help students explore critical Constitutional Law issues grounded in a US-India comparative framework. It gave the students an opportunity to analyse, compare, and discuss in-depth issues related to personal liberty, freedom of choice, reproductive rights, and personal autonomy.
This video covers session I and II. The workshop was attended by over 50 students from various universities, including TNNLU, St. Joseph’s College of Law, Bengaluru, School of Law, Christ University, Bengaluru, Karnataka State Law University, Symbiosis International University, Hyderabad, and National Law University, Delhi. 10 other persons were present, including faculty members, U.S. Consulate staff, and the CLPR team. Due to COVID-19-related circumstances, the U.S. partner law university had to pull out of the workshop.
The Agendas for session I and II are provided below:
9:30 am – 11:30 am – Session I: Constitutional Founding
Part I
The first session covered the constitution-making process in the U.S. and India. The students were then posed with the questions: ‘should Constitutions be written democratically?’ and ‘were the American and Indian constitution-making processes democratic enough?’ The discussions revolved around themes related to constitution-making, such as election processes, diversity, and representation. This helped students comparatively evaluate the democratic legitimacy of the U.S. and India’s constitutional founding.
Session Readings:

Making of the U.S. Constitution compiled by CLPR
Constitution Making in India: A Primer by Sudhir Krishnaswamy and Vineeth Krishna
Excerpts from The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of A Nation by Granville Austin (Oxford India Paperbacks, 1999)
Excerpts from The Federalist by Jack N. Rakove (Palgrave Macmillan, 2003)
The Making of India’s Constitution, YouTube, CLPR Trust

Presentation Slides: Session I Part I
Part II
CLPR resource persons introduced students to ‘due process’ and ‘procedure established by law’—two important concepts relating to the constitutional protection of liberty. Students were provided with a summary of how U.S. and Indian Constitution framers engaged with these concepts. This was followed by an activity where students engaged with a hypothetical case designed by CLPR that involved questions of liberty as seen through the eyes of U.S. and Indian Constitution framers.
Session Readings:

Excerpts from Indian Constituent Assembly debates on Due Process
A Letter from Phocion to the Considerate Citizens of New York by Alexander Hamilton [1–27 January 1784]

Presentation Slides: Session I Part II
Speaker Remarks
Dr. Amal Sethi, Senior Fellow, University of Hamburg, closed the session with his remarks. Dr. Sethi suggested that the primary conceptual prism through which one must evaluate the U.S. and Indian Constitutions is ‘constitutional endurance’. The fundamental commonality between the two constitutions, Sethi argued, was that they survived the test of time. He proceeded to discuss why some constitutions endure while others collapse. A student Question and Answer Session followed.
***
11.45 am – 1:45 pm – Session II: Personal Liberty and Freedom of Choice
Part I
CLPR resource persons provided an overview of the constitutional and legal architecture that governed personal liberty and freedom of choice in the U.S. and India. In the discussion that followed, students aimed to understand if and how the U.S and India Supreme Courts expanded personality liberty while deciding cases. Students then located the Right to Marry and Right to Choice within the two constitutional regimes.
Session Readings:

Article 21 of the Constitution of India, 1950 and Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of United States
The Origins of Due Process in India: The Role of Borrowing in Personal Liberty and Preventive Detention Cases’ by Manoj Mate (Berkeley Journal of International Law, 2010)
Substantive Due Process: A History of Liberty in the Due Process Clause by William R. Musgrove (University of St. Thomas Journal of Law and Public Policy, 2008)

Presentation Slides: Session II Part I
Part II
Students were introduced to two cases relating to the right to marry: Loving v Virginia, 1967 (U.S.) and Shafin Jahan v Ashokan, 2018 (India). Students engaged with both the cases, paying particular attention to how the Indian and U.S. Courts applied (or didn’t apply) the Right to Liberty and Freedom in these cases. This was followed by a discussion on religious conversion laws and inter-racial marriages.
Session Readings:

Excerpts from Shafin Jahan v Ashokan K.M. (2018) 16 SCC 368
Loving v. Virginia 388 US 1 (1967)

Presentation slides: Session II Part II
Speaker Remarks
Senior Advocate Jayna Kothari, Executive Director of CLPR, concluded the session by closely tracking the Courts’ reasoning in Loving v Virginia, 1967 and Shafin Jahan v Ashokan, 2018. Ms. Kothari suggested to students that the Right to Marry was not just a matter of freedom but also equality.

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















