






























Desk Brief: Why Do Some Union Expenses Not Require Parliament’s Approval? - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Why Do Some Union Expenses Not Require Parliament’s Approval?


 
















Desk Brief: Why Do Some Union Expenses Not Require Parliament’s Approval?



Blog



Editorial Team






31 March 2022

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

Yesterday, the Rajya Sabha approved the Appropriation Bill 2022. The Lok Sabha had done the same a week ago. With this, the Union Government is now authorized to withdraw Rs 122.43 lakh crore from the Consolidated Fund of India to meet its planned expenditure for 2022-23. This amount is the total of all ‘demand for grants’ put forward by various Union ministries in Parliament’s budget session. Each of these proposals was put to vote and obtained Lok Sabha approval.
These procedures are laid down in Article 112, Article 113, and Article 114 of our Constitution which aims to ensure parliamentary oversight of the Union Executive’s finances. However, there are a few items of expenditure like the salaries of the President and Supreme Court judges that should not be ‘submitted to the vote of Parliament’. This exception attracted criticism in the Constituent Assembly.
When these provisions were taken up for debate (as Draft Articles 92 and 93), the economist K.T. Shah insisted that independent India’s Parliament must in principle have the power to vote on any expenditure. The idea of keeping certain expenditures outside the ambit of a parliamentary vote, he continued, was a legacy of British rule:
‘For that regime, no doubt, it can be understood that there were many items of expenditure which it did not care, would not dare, to bring before the representatives of the Indian people. For instance, its huge defence expenditure, or its Home charges, and so on, if open to a Parliamentary vote, would never allow the Budget to be passed.’
In a similar vein, Shibban Lal Saxena pointed to a sub-clause in Draft Article 93 that allowed future parliaments to add to the list of expenditures that did not require parliamentary approval. Saxena appeared rather livid, and termed the provision as ‘…unprecedented in any constitution of the world…’ and asked Ambedkar to ‘…enlighten us how [the provision exception is] in consonance with democratic procedure…’ He felt that India’s ‘…sovereign parliament of the nation should have the right vote on every item of expenditure…’
Neither Ambedkar nor other members responded to these arguments. It appears that Shah and Saxena were alone in their concerns. The Assembly adopted the Articles with no amendments.
If we look closely at the items of expenditure that Draft Article 93 placed outside the ambit of Parliament’s vote – these include those related to the autonomous constitutional functionaries like the President, Judiciary and Comptroller, and Auditor-General. It’s likely that our Constitution framers felt that the independence of these functionaries and the separation of powers would be compromised if Parliament was given the authority to decide upon these institutions’ sensitive expenditures.

Tags Indian Constituent AssemblyUnion Budget 








Suggested Reading


Constitution Day Campaign | Kozhikode | Mock Parliament and Quiz










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















