






























Jairamdas Daulatram - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Jairamdas Daulatram


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Jairamdas Daulatram
1891 - 1979




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Patiala and East Punjab States Union
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Sindhi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Fundamental Rights+2 moreSub-Committee on MinoritiesProvincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography


 





Biography


Early Life
Jairamdas Daulatram was born on 21st July 1891 to a Sindhi family.
He joined the Indian National Congress as a young man, and later was elected to the Bombay Legislative Council. From 1935-38, he was appointed as a member of various Committees and Sub-Committees on labour rights and issues.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Daulatram developed a good relationship with Mahatma Gandhi, and resigned from the Bombay Legislative Council in 1930 to join Gandhi’s Salt Satyagraha. At Gandhi’s request, he became a member of the Foreign Cloth Boycott Committee and travelled to several different provinces to convince local administrations to support the boycott.
Contribution to Constitution Making
At the time of independence, Daulatram was appointed the Governor of Bihar. He resigned from this position in 1948 due to conflict with the Chief Minister, after which he ran for re-election to the Constituent Assembly.
Daulatram won the election from East Punjab on a Congress party ticket. He did not actively participate in the debates, although he was a member of three important Committees and two Sub-Committees.
Later Contributions
From 1948 until 1950, he held the position of Union Minister for Food and Agriculture (1948–50). Later, he was appointed as the Governor of Assam (1949–56). In 1951, he commissioned the Assam Rifles regiment, led by Major Ralengnao Khathing, to capture Tawang, then part of the Tibetan autonomous region under Chinese control. This brought him into conflict with Nehru, who had not authorized the action.
As a major proponent of the Sindhi language and literature, Daulatram was one of the founding members of the Akhil Bharat Sindhi Boli Ain Sahit Sabha (All India Sindhi Language and Literature Congress). In 1957, he chaired a Convention to demand the recognition of Sindhi under the Eighth Schedule of the Indian Constitution.
He passed away on 1st March 1979.
Key Writings:
Daulatram’s private papers are stored by the National Archives of India.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















