






























Article 354: Application of provisions relating to distribution of revenues while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation. - Constitution of India

























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part XVIII

Article
354



Application of provisions relating to distribution of revenues while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

(1) The President may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, by order direct that all or any of the provisions of articles 268 to 279 shall for such period, not extending in any case beyond the expiration of the financial year in which such Proclamation ceases to operate, as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks fit.
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.



 
 

Version 1




Article 277, Draft Constitution of India 1948
The President may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, by order, direct that all or any of the provisions of articles 249 to 259 of this Constitution shall for such period, not extending in any case beyond the expiration of the financial year in which such proclamation ceases to operate, as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks fit.




Version 2


Article 354, Constitution of India 1950
(1) The President may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, by order direct that all or any of the provisions of articles 268 to 279 shall for such period, not extending in any case beyond the expiration of the financial year in which such Proclamation ceases to operate, as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks fit.
⁠(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.




Summary




Draft Article 277 was discussed in the Assembly on 19 and 20 August 1949. It addressed the consequences of emergency on financial resources of the Union and States. The Draft Article empowered the President to make changes to the constitutional provisions on distribution of finances between the Union and states during an emergency. This order was time bound – it would expire by the end of financial year in which the emergency ended.
The Drafting Committee Chairman introduced another clause to this Draft Article – both houses of Parliament must approve the Presidential order. The Chairman felt that the power to alter financial arrangements between the Union and States cannot be left to the discretion of the President. He wanted Parliament to have a say in such important issues.
A Member opposed this amendment as he felt it didn’t change the existing power of Parliament. The Parliament had an inherent right to consider any matter of its choice. Further, he thought the powers given to the President under this provision were very wide. He believed that giving wide powers would adversely affect the financial obligations of the States. To restrict such power, he proposed to only permit the President to make changes to the transfer of income tax revenue to States.
Another Member supported curtailing the powers of the President under this Draft Article. The Draft Article would affect the budgets and planned expenditure of States causing undue financial hardship. He suggested that instead of passing a separate order, the changes to the financial provisions in the Constitution should be listed in the proclamation of emergency. This could be deliberated on by Parliament when approving the proclamation.
A Member highlighted that this power could be misused if the party in power at the Union and State levels are different. A few Members requested for the Draft Article to be reconsidered and discussed on a later date.
A Drafting Committee Member clarified that this power had been given only during an emergency. It would not completely change the fiscal structure, only a few necessary changes would be made. Nonetheless, Parliament could alter the financial arrangements even during normal circumstances.
The Drafting Committee Chairman responded to the opposition stating that the President would act reasonably and would not unduly alter the financial arrangements between the Union and States. He emphasized that the power of the President should not be curtailed and the Draft Article should be flexible to accommodate the prevailing circumstances.
The Assembly accepted the Chairman’s amendment and rejected the others.
The Draft Article was adopted with the amendment on 20 August 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















