






























B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights


 
















B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights



Blog



Meenakshi Ramkumar






10 December 2021

Share









 
									Image credit: Wikimedia Commons								

In 1919, a New York State Court judge felt strange that a ‘…a young man, 29 years of age, of intelligence, a striking example of the educational system of this country, able-bodied, of full intellect’ advocated for communism1. The ‘young man’ was Benjamin Gitlow, the co-founder of the Communist Party of America.
The New York State Court convicted Gitlow of criminal anarchy for publishing copies of the Left-Wing Manifesto in 19191. Among other things, the manifesto emphasized the necessity of accomplishing the ‘Communist Revolution’ by militant and ‘revolutionary Socialism’. The Appellate Division and Court of Appeals (New York) upheld the lower court decision.
The matter then reached the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court upheld the conviction2, and conspicuously held that the freedom of speech under the U.S. Constitution was not absolute.
28 years later, the Gitlow case found its way into the framing of India’s Constitution. On 4 November 1948, B.R. Ambedkar was faced with criticism from his Constituent Assembly colleagues: why were there restrictions on fundamental rights in the Draft Constitution? Some Assembly members felt that the restrictions effectively nullified the rights and claimed that freedom of speech in the U.S. was real since it was not restricted. Ambedkar rebuked this comparative point stating that ‘it is wrong to say that fundamental rights in America are absolute’ and quoted from the Gitlow judgment:
The matter then reached the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court upheld the conviction, and conspicuously held that the freedom of speech under the U.S. Constitution was not absolute. Share on X
‘It is a fundamental principle, long established, that the freedom of speech and of the press, which is secured by the Constitution, does not confer an absolute right to speak or publish, without responsibility, whatever one may choose, or an unrestricted and unbridled license that gives immunity for every possible use of language and prevents the punishment of those who abuse this freedom.’
Ambedkar added that while the U.S. Constitution contained fundamental rights that were absolute, the Court eventually had to step in, as they did in Gitlow, to impose limitations. He claimed the Draft Constitution wanted to avoid this by limiting these rights in the Constitution and keeping the judiciary away from deciding what restrictions apply.
The Assembly appeared convinced by these arguments and in the end, they adopted a fundamental rights chapter – including the freedom of speech provisions with restrictions.
Gitlow, B. and Darrow, C. (1920) “N/A,” in The “Red Ruby” Address to the Jury. New York, New York: Communist sic Labor Part, pp. 3–16. [↩]Gitlow v. People of New York (1925). [↩]








Suggested Reading


Constitution Day Quiz 2021



Four More Teams Qualify, Stage is Set for ConQuest Grand Finale on 25 October



“The Advocate” | Film Screening & Discussion



B.N. Rau’s ‘Outlines of a New Constitution’










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

The Tamil Nadu Governor and Constitutional Conventions

25 February 2023
												• By Siddharth Jha

On 9 January 2023, the Governor of Tamil Nadu chose to skip certain portions of the speech prepared by the state government, while addressing the first session of the Legislative Assembly in the new year. This kicked off a huge political row, with the ruling party in Tamil Nadu alleging a serious breach of “convention”.


 3 mins										




 

The Influence of Dewey’s Ideas of Social Forces on B.R. Ambedkar

16 May 2023
												• By Siddharth Jha

A recent book by Scott Stroud carefully explores the influence of philosopher John Dewey and his pragmatic philosophy on B.R. Ambedkar. Here, we focus on one strand of this influence: Dewey’s ideas of social forces and the role of the individual in effecting social change. 


 3 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















