






























Bashir Husain Zaidi - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Bashir Husain Zaidi


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Bashir Husain Zaidi
1898 - 1992




Key Information

Party: Janata
Constituency: Rampur/Banares
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Urdu
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Bashir Husain Zaidi was born on 26 July 1898 in Uttar Pradesh. He completed his education at the Arabic High School and St. Stephen’s College, Delhi.  He also studied at Punjab University, Cambridge University, and Lincoln’s Inn. As a student, he was the Indian Representative to the International Students’ Conference at Czechoslovakia (1921) and Holland (1922).
He served as the headmaster at the University School in Aligarh (1923) and entered the Rampur State Service in 1930. He was the Chief Minister of Rampur State, a princely state in present-day Uttar Pradesh (1937-1949).
Contribution to Constitution Making
He was a part of the Constituent Assembly as the representative of the princely state of Rampur/Benares. He was not an active member of the Assembly but did talk about the upliftment of minority communities, in particular the Muslim minority and the importance of democracy.
Later Contributions
Zaidi was a member of the Provisional Parliament of India (1950-1952) He served as a member of the Indian Council of Technical Education and the Indian Delegation to the General Assembly of the United Nations (1951). He was the Director of several industrial organisations and a member of various educational institution committees.


 



Key Speeches



In his first speech  in the Assembly, Zaidi argued that it is important for minorities to be self-reliant and trust the community at large instead of relying on other safeguards like reservations, which only help on paper.
He also stated that the Constitution will only exist and work if there is faith in democracy. He felt that being too critical or suspicious of every issue would only derail the Constitution-making process.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















