






























Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir
1899 - 1976




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Patiala and East Punjab States Union
Religion: Sikh
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Punjabi
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Born on 15th January 1899 in Adhval village in Campbellpore district of Punjab (present-day Attock district in Pakistan), Gurmukh Singh completed his primary education in his village and then went on to Rawalpindi for his secondary schooling. After his matriculation, he trained as a junior vernacular teacher and was appointed as a teacher at the Khalsa High School of Kallar in 1918. During his four years of teaching, he earned the epithet ‘Giani’ and adopted the pseudonym ‘Musafir’.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Giani Gurmukh Singh was deeply moved by the terrible Jallianwala Bagh massacre in 1919 and the Nankana Saheb massacre in 1921, which led him to give up teaching in 1922 and join the freedom struggle. He became associated with the Akali movement, which was the political awakening of the Sikhs. His participation in the Guru ka Bagh agitation in 1922 led to his imprisonment, the first of the many that were to follow as a result of his participation in the Civil Disobedience Movement, the Individual Satyagraha, and the Quit India Movement. He became a member of the All India Congress Committee in 1930, and around the same time, he was also appointed the Jathedar (head) of the Akal Takht, the highest religious office of Sikhism.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir was a member of the Constituent Assembly from 1947 to 1950 elected from East Punjab on the Congress Party ticket. In the Constituent Assembly, he made interventions in citizenship and separate electorates.
Later Contributions
He was appointed as the President of the Punjab Pradesh Congress Committee in 1949 and became a member of the Congress Working Committee in 1952. He was elected to the Lok Sabha from the Amritsar constituency in 1952, 1957, and 1962. In 1966 he resigned to serve as the Chief Minister of Punjab for a short tenure of five months. He also served as a member of the Rajya Sabha from 1968 to 1974.
He died on 18th January 1976 in Delhi. He was posthumously awarded the Padma Vibhushan in 1976 and the Sahitya Akademi Award in 1978 for his short story collection. 
Key Writings
Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir was a writer and poet. His published works include nine collections of poems, eight collections of short stories, and four biographical works, including one about his association with Gandhi, VekhyaSunya Gandhi, and one about his association with Nehru, VekhyaSunya Nehru.


 



Key Speeches



Musafir applauded the Constituent Assembly for rejecting separate electorates and for dealing with the question of minorities sensitively, quoting Mohammad Iqbal’s famous couplet in cupport of communal unity.
On the question of language, he believed there should be a single national language, but could not choose between Hindi and Hindustani.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















