






























Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy
1913 - 1996




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: 
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Telugu
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy was born on 19 May 1913 in Illur village of the State of Andhra Pradesh. He completed his primary education at the Theosophical High School, Adyar, Madras and later joined the Government Arts College in Anantapuram for his higher studies. He eventually dropped out of college to pursue a more active role in the Indian freedom struggle. Reddy’s political career took off when he was elected as a member of the Madras Legislative Assembly.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
In the pre-independence era, Reddy actively participated in various Youth Congress activities. In 1937, he became the Secretary of the Andhra Provincial Congress Committee (APCC). Due to Reddy’s significant involvement in the Quit India Movement, he was imprisoned several times by the British from 1940 to 1945.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Reddy was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Madras Province on a Congress party ticket. He did not make any interventions during the Assembly debates.
Later Contributions:
Reddy was elected as the President of the APCC in 1951 for a year. Soon after, he served as the Chief Minister of the newly formed state of Andhra Pradesh in 1956. During his tenure as the State leader, he worked towards the development and modernisation of the State and initiated several irrigation projects such as the construction of Nagarjunasagar, Srisailam, Sriramsagar and Vamsadhara dams.
Later, Reddy served as a member of the Rajya Sabha for three terms. In 1964, he joined Lal Bahadur Shastri’s government as the Union Minister for Steel and Mines. He also served as the Minister of Transport, Aviation, Shipping and Tourism in Indira Gandhi’s Government for a short while in 1967.
Reddy was elected to the fourth Lok Sabha (1967) and was subsequently elected as the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. He was the first Member of Parliament in the country to have resigned from his political party upon being appointed as Speaker. The first arrest on the grounds of contempt of the House was made during his tenure as the Speaker. He was known for being an unbiased Spekar who facilitated all members to express their opinions. The Committee of the Welfare of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was set up during his Speakership.
On 25 July 1977, Reddy was elected to be the sixth President of India. At the age of 65, he was the youngest President of the country and the only one to have been elected unopposed.
Reddy passed away in 1996 at the age of 83.
Key Writings:
Reddy authored a book titled, ‘Without Fear Or Favour: Reminiscences and Reflections of a President’ detailing his time as the President of India.


 



Resources



Speeches of President Sanjiva Reddy: January 1, 1980-July 24, 1982
Whither Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy, Issued by Telangana Mahasabha
Without Fear Or Favour: Reminiscences and Reflections of a President, N. Sanjeeva Reddy.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















