






























Book Discussion | Dr. Mathew John’s Book ‘India’s Communal Constitution: Law, Religion, and the Making of a People’ - Constitution of India































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Book Discussion | Dr. Mathew John’s Book ‘India’s Communal Constitution: Law, Religion, and the Making of a People’


 



Talks
Book Discussion | Dr. Mathew John’s Book ‘India’s Communal Constitution: Law, Religion, and the Making of a People’
The Editorial Team









										21 Dec										- 									
21 Dec

2023


Talks



 Venue
National Law School of India University (NLSIU)


Share









The Pluralist Agreement and Constitutional Transformation (PACT) project invites you to a book discussion of Dr. Mathew John’s ‘India’s Communal Constitution: Law, Religion, and the Making of a People‘ on Thursday, December 21, 2023.

Dr. Mathew John, is Associate Professor and Executive Director, Centre on Public Law and Jurisprudence at the Jindal Global Law School (JGLS). Dr Rinku Lamba and Dr Aparna Chandra will be the discussants.
The discussion will take place from 5.30 pm onwards (IST) in a hybrid format. The offline discussion will take place at the Old Academic Block of the NLSIU campus. This session will follow our usual format of the author presenting their work (30 minutes), after which the discussants will provide their comments (10-15 minutes each). This will be followed by questions from the audience.
The PACT project aims to draw lessons regarding the democratic legitimacy of constitutions from the Indian example, while analysing its unfulfilled potential for pluralism and democracy in the present. In the past we have hosted book panels discussing Kalpana Kannabiran’s ‘The Speaking Constitution‘, Alexander Hudson’s ‘The Veil of Participation‘, and most recently, Achyut Chetan’s ‘Founding Mothers of the Indian Republic‘.
This event is open to all including members of the public.
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















