






























Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah
1905 - 1982




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Jammu and Kashmir
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Kashmiri
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early life
Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah was born on 5 December 1905, in a village on the outskirts of Srinagar, Kashmir. He went on to play a dominant role in Kashmiri politics for over half a century, and was instrumental in Jammu and Kashmir’s accession to the Indian Union.
Abdullah graduated from Punjab University in 1928, and completed his postgraduation in Physics from Aligarh Muslim University in 1930. The anti-colonial politics at these university spaces inspired him to resign from his job as a school teacher and work full time for the betterment of the Muslim masses in Kashmir.
His first major political engagement was during the protests against the death of 21 people in police firing in July 1931, for which he was arrested. Soon after his release, he founded the All Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Conference in October 1932.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Abdullah soon realised that modern Kashmiri politics needed to reorient itself on a secular and anti-feudal axis. Consequently, the party was renamed as the National Conference in 1939, and formed linkages with both minority leaders within Kashmir and the national-level Congress leadership. His personal camaraderie and shared ideology with Jawaharlal Nehru aided the process.
In 1946, the National Conference started the massive ‘Quit Kashmir’ movement against the ruling Dogra dynasty. Abdullah also succeeded Nehru as the President of the All India State Peoples’ Conference, but was soon arrested by the Maharaja on charges of sedition. Nehru protested against this suppression, but was prevented from entering the State.
After his release post-independence, Abdullah asserted the right of the people of Jammu and Kashmir to decide the future of the State. He mobilised the people for the defence of Kashmir against the tribal aggressors supported by the Pakistani state, and urged the Maharaja to accept accession to India. On 5 March 1948, he was appointed as the Prime Minister of the State.
Contributions to Constitution Making
Abdullah joined the Constituent Assembly of India on 16 June 1949. He did not speak in the Assembly, but played a critical role in negotiating the terms of entry of Jammu and Kashmir into the Indian Union, which granted it a distinct status.
Later Contributions
As Prime Minister of Jammu and Kashmir from 1948 to 1953, he implemented a vigorous programme of land reforms which saw the abolishment of Zamindari, implementation of land ceilings, transfer of land to the landless, and equitable tenurial arrangements. These reforms have been hailed as the most substantive and impactful among all the states in India. He was also a part of the Constituent Assembly of Jammu and Kashmir which drafted the State Constitution from 1951 to 1956.
Abdullah was unceremoniously arrested and dismissed from office in 1953, as part of a coup engineered by dissidents in the National Government. In this affair, the new Prime Minister Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad got tacit approval and support from Nehru, who was increasingly disillusioned with Abdullah’s refusal to commit to India and curb secessionist tendencies. He was released briefly in 1958, only to be arrested again and was finally released only in 1964 when the conspiracy case against him was withdrawn at Nehru’s intervention.
The erosion of autonomy granted to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 had made Abdullah sceptical about the Union government’s intentions, but he accepted the finality of accession in 1975 under the Kashmir Accord, and returned as Chief Minister with the support of the Congress party. The revived National Conference swept the polls in 1977, and he remained Chief Minister up until he passed away on 8 September 1982. He was succeeded as Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir by his son Farooq Abdullah.
Key Writings
Abdullah was a prolific writer in Urdu, which includes his posthumously published autobiography, Aatish-e-Chinar (1986).


 



Resources



Eminent Parlimentarians Series (Lok Sabha Secretariat, 1990)
Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah, 1905-82 by Balraj Puri (Economic and Political Weekly, 1982)
Article 370: A Constitutional History of Jammu and Kashmir by A.G. Noorani (Oxford University Press, 2011)
India After Gandhi: The History of the World’s Largest Democracy by Ramachandra Guha (Picador India, 2007)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















