






























Nibaran Chandra Laskar - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Nibaran Chandra Laskar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Nibaran Chandra Laskar
1908 - 1987




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Assam
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Scheduled Caste
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Nibaran Chandra Laskar was born in February 1908 at Cachar district in Assam. He completed his schooling at Hailakandi H.E. School. Laskar went on to graduate with a masters in Sanskrit from Dhaka University (1931). He performed well in his academics and was ranked first at Dhaka University.
Laskar was appointed as a Senior Professor of Sanskrit and Bengali at G.C. College in Silchar (1935-45).
Laskar was an avid reader. He also enjoyed travelling and gardening. He was very interested in sports as well particularly Football, Cricket and Tennis.
Role in Indian Independence Movement
After resigning as a Senior Professor, Laskar was actively involved in the Indian freedom movement and joined the Indian National Congress. He began his political career as a member of the Silchar Municipal Board (1946-1949) and later took up various local administrative positions in Assam – President of Cachar Kalyan Samiti (1946-48) and General Secretary of Samaj Sanjivani Samiti in Cachar.
Laskar participated in social reform movements as well. His focus was Dalit rights issues. He started various programs and campaigns to abolish untouchability and promote the welfare of backward classes. After the partition of Indian in 1947 he worked on rehabilitating refugees in Assam.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Laskar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Assam on a Congress Party ticket. He spoke on reservation for Scheduled Castes in Parliament and State Legislatures.
Contributions Post-Independence
Laskar continued to play an important role in public life after independence. He was a member of the Assam Legislative Assembly (1947—52). He was then elected as a member of the First Lok Sabha (1952—57).
He contributed to administration and governance both at the provincial and national level. He was a member of the All-India Cottage Industries Board (1949—52), Rehabilitation Finance Administration in Assam and Public Accounts Committee (1955—57). He also served as the Deputy Minister for Relief and Rehabilitation, in Assam (1951-52).
This strong Dalit leader passed away on 25 June 1987.


 



Key Speeches


When the Assembly discussed reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Parliament, Laskar raised a concern that the Scheduled Castes in Assam would not have any representation due to the decrease in their population after partition.


 



Resources


Dalit Movement in India and Its Leaders (1857-1956) by Ramacandra Kshirasagara, (M.D. Publications, 1994).


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















