






























Keshavrao Jedhe - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Keshavrao Jedhe


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Keshavrao Jedhe
1896 - 1959




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Marathi
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Keshavrao Jedhe was born on 21 April 1896 as the youngest of four brothers in the deeply influential and wealthy Jedhe family of Pune. The family ran a brass factory and were actively involved in the political and social movements of the region.
Keshavrao did his school education from Poona Municipal School, Poona Highschool and the Poona New English School. In 1918 he began his intermediate studies at Fergusson College, Pune but after 2 years discontinued his studies owing to his greater interest in social movements. For a short while he took up teaching at the Shivaji Maratha Highschool in Pune.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Jedhe’s political activities were massively influenced by his family’s role in Maharashtrian politics. The residence of the Jedhe family, called the ‘Jedhe Mansion’ was the centre of many social reform movements and the meeting ground for non-Brahmin political leaders. Jedhe was a strong Maratha leader who was involved in the non-Brahmnin movement of the region and was the primary anchor of Jotirao Phule’s Satyashodak Samaj in the early 20th century. Scholar Gail Omvedt described him as a militant Satyashodak leader.
He was ideologically and politically opposed to Tilak and similar orthodox traditionalists of Maharashtra. He organized the Chatrapati Mela as a mark of protest against Tilak’s Ganpati festival, where non-brahmins and educated women were often slandered. Jedhe’s Chatrapati Mela brough together young men from marginalized castes and non-Brahmin communities. Songs composed by Jedhe were popularly played throughout the Mela. These were often highly critical of the Hindu Mahasabha, valourized Shivaji, contrasted Hindu religion against the ‘Brahmin Dharma’ and threw strong attacks against the caste system.
In the later part of the 1920s, he took part in peasant movements, began organizing them and attempted to address their concerns. He supported the Bardoli Satyagraha where peasants protested against increased taxes, and held a huge conference for the peasants in 1928. His anti-caste politics pushed him to participate passionately in the Mahad and Parvati Satyagraha.
He was elected to the Poona municipality in 1925. He was a member of the Central Legislative Assembly. By 1927 he was more interested in the national movement led by the Congress and became less active in the work of the non-Brahmin Party, particularly upset by the pro-government leanings of many of its leaders. Jedhe began his involvement with the Maharashtra Congress in the 1930s. He was elected President of the Maharashtra Pradesh Congress Committee in 1938 and 1946. In 1948 he left the Congress and founded the Peasants and Workers Party (PWP). For his nationalist activities, Jedhe was imprisoned for almost four years.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Jedhe was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Bombay province on a Congress Party ticket. He did not speak much during the Assembly proceedings. But he was a strong supporter of the formation of linguistic provinces. He supported resolutions in the Assembly that were moved with the specific demand of forming linguistic provinces and redistributing territory.
Later Contributions
Jedhe stood for the 1952 Lok Sabha election as the PWP candidate but lost the elections. Following this defeat, he left the PWP and returned to Congress. In 1958 he won the Lok Sabha elections as a Congress candidate.
He passed away on 12 November 1959.
Key Writings
Jedhe began and successfully ran newspapers like Jansatte, a Marathi weekly paper and ‘Shivsmarak’, another weekly.


 



Key Speeches



Jedhe was worried that the country would have a dictatorial rule instead of a democracy as the Constitution gave enormous power to the Centre, especially the President.
He was disappointed that the new Constitution did not bring into existence a Marathi-speaking province called ‘Samyukta Maharashtra’ and hoped for the future creation of such a State.



 



Resources



Keshavrao Jedhe Charitra by Y.D. Phadke (Keshavrao Jedhe Foundation, 1982)
Bahujan Samajateel Karmaveer by Prof. Dattatray Sakharam Darekar (Saket Prakashan, 1944)
Keshavrao Jedhe: a Non-Brahman Nationalist Political Leader by Vijay Nalawade (Shivaji University, 1984)
देशभक्त केशवराव जेधे माहिती पट by Deshbhakt Keshavrao Jedhe Foundation (YouTube Video, 2021)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















