






























List III: Concurrent List - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
						 ≫ 
						Schedules
						 ≫ 
						List III: Concurrent List


 








Seventh Schedule

Article 246


List III: Concurrent List





1.


Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at the commencement of this Constitution but excluding offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in List I or List II and excluding the use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid of the civil power.




2.


Criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Criminal Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution.




3.


Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State, the maintenance of public order, or the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community; persons subjected to such detention.




4.


Removal from one State to another State of prisoners, accused persons and persons subjected to preventive detention for reasons specified in entry 3 of this List.




5.


Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and succession; joint family and partition; all matters in respect of which parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution subject to their personal law.




6.


Transfer of property other than agricultural land; registration of deeds and documents.




7.


Contracts, including partnership, agency, contracts of carriage, and other special forms of contracts, but not including contracts relating to agricultural land.




8.


Actionable wrongs.




9.


Bankruptcy and insolvency.




10.


Trust and Trustees.




11.


Administrators-general and official trustees.




11A.


Administration of Justice; constitution and organisation of all courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Courts.




12.


Evidence and oaths; recognition of laws, public acts and records, and judicial proceedings.




13.


Civil procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution, limitation and arbitration.




14.


Contempt of court, but not including contempt of the Supreme Court.




15.


Vagrancy; nomadic and migratory tribes.




16.


Lunacy and mental deficiency, including places for the reception or treatment of lunatics and mental deficients.




17.


Prevention of cruelty to animals.




17A.


Forests.




17B.


Protection of wild animals and birds.




18.


Adulteration of foodstuffs and other goods.




19.


Drugs and poisons, subject to the provisions of entry 59 of List I with respect to opium.




20.


Economic and social planning.




20A.


Population control and family planning.




21.


Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts.




22.


Trade unions; industrial and labour disputes.




23.


Social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment.




24.


Welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds, employers’ liability, workmen’s compensation, invalidity and old age pensions and maternity benefits.




25.


Education, including technical education, medical education and universities, subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical training of labour.




26.


Legal, medical and other professions.




27.


Relief and rehabilitation of persons displaced from their original place of residence by reason of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan.




28.


Charities and charitable institutions, charitable and religious endowments and religious institutions.




29.


Prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or contagious diseases or pests affecting men, animals or plants.




30.


Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.




31.


Ports other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law to be major ports.




32.


Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechanically propelled vessels, and the rule of the road on such waterways, and the carriage of passengers and goods on inland waterways subject to the provisions of List I with respect to national waterways.




33.


Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of,—
(a) the products of any industry where the control of such industry by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest, and imported goods of the same kind as such products;
(b) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils;
(c) cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concentrates;
(d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed; and
(e) raw jute.




33A.


Weights and measures except establishment of standards.




34.


Price control.




35.


Mechanically propelled vehicles including the principles on which taxes on such vehicles are to be levied.




36.


Factories.




37.


Boilers.




38.


Electricity.




39.


Newspapers, books and printing presses.




40.


Archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance.




41.


Custody, management and disposal of property (including agricultural land) declared by law to be evacuee property.




42.


Acquisition and requisitioning of property.




43.


Recovery in a State of claims in respect of taxes and other public demands, including arrears of land-revenue and sums recoverable as such arrears, arising outside that State.




44.


Stamp duties other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial stamps, but not including rates of stamp duty.




45.


Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters specified in List II or List III.




46.


Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters in this List.




47.


Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any court.















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















