






























5 Essential Writings on Constitution Making - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										5 Essential Writings on Constitution Making


 
















5 Essential Writings on Constitution Making



Blog



Editorial Team






07 September 2022

Share









 
On 4 September 2022, around 13 million Chileans voted to reject what many consider as the most progressive Constitution ever written. This new Constitution was drafted by a 155-strong Constituent Assembly which was charged to replace the old 1980 Constitution imposed by the military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet. The Chilean constitution-making process and its failure has generated renewed attention and debate around constitution making.
Over the decades, a sizeable and eclectic body of literature around constitution making has emerged in academia. Here we spotlight 5 works which we think are invaluable in making sense of Chilean constitutional developments and constitution-making more generally.
Note: By no means is this an exhaustive list.
1. Forces and Mechanisms in the Constitution-Making Process by Jon Elster, published in Duke Law Journal, Vol. 45, No. 2, pp. 364-396 (1995)
This is Jon Elster’s path-breaking work on constitution making. Among other things, it proposed a framework to analyse deliberations in a Constituent Assembly. Elster suggested that Constituent Assembly members will engage in forms of ‘arguing’ and ‘bargaining’ to support or reject constitutional proposals. Nearly three decades since it was published, Forces and Mechanisms occupies a canonical status in the study of constitution making.
| JSTOR |
2. Making Constitutions in Deeply Divided Societies by Hanna Lerner, published by Cambridge University Press (2011)
How do societies divided on social, economic, and political lines find agreement on their constitutional futures? Using India, Israel and Ireland as case studies, Hanna Lerner argues that Constitution making in deeply divided societies can be successful if they adopt an ‘incrementalist’ approach: one that defers contentious constitutional choices to the future, among other strategies.
| Cambridge University Press | Amazon |
3. Constituent Assemblies, Edited by Jon Elster, Columbia University, New York, Roberto Gargarella, Universidad Torcuato Di Tella, Buenos Aires, Vatsal Naresh, Yale University, Connecticut, Bjørn Erik Rasch, Universitetet i Oslo, published by Cambridge University Press (2018)
This collection of papers scrutinises Constituent Assemblies in a number of countries, including Turkey, Nepal, Iceland, Tunisia, Ecuador and from multiple historical periods. It provides insights on why some constitution making projects succeed and why some fail through diverse theoretical and disciplinary lenses.
| Cambridge University Press | Amazon |
4. Constitutionalism in Context, Edited by David S. Law, University of Virginia, published by Cambridge University Press (2022)
Comparative constitutionalism usually focuses on some predictable countries – the US, Turkey, India, Israel, and most of Western Europe. This collection of papers broadens its geographical engagement to include countries like Sudan, Taiwan, and Argentina that have received scant attention. The book’s structure has elements that make it akin, but not identical, to a textbook – allowing it to be used in classroom settings.
| Cambridge University Press | Amazon |
5. Principles of Constitutional Design by Donald S. Lutz, University of Houston, published by Cambridge University Press (2006)
The author claims that the book ‘is written for anyone anywhere sitting down to write a Constitution’. That said, the book doesn’t provide a checklist or set of instructions on how to write Constitutions. It broadly lays out the ‘nature and problems of constitutionalism and its fundamental building blocks’ as a first step towards in thinking about constitutional design. In addition to constitution drafters, this book is useful to anyone interested in Constitutions generally.
| Cambridge University Press | Amazon |

Tags Chile Constitution 2022Constitution MakingReading List 








Suggested Reading


The British Game of Sovereignty










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Ladakh’s Sixth Schedule Demand

25 February 2023
												• By Varsha Nair

Ladakh has been witnessing huge protests demanding constitutional safeguards for the region under the Sixth Schedule. We examine if this demand is legitimate. 


 3 mins										




 

B.N. Rau’s ‘Outlines of a New Constitution’

26 February 2023
												• By Siddharth Jha

Sir Benegal Narsing Rau played a key role in the making of our Constitution, as Constitutional Adviser. In this blog, we draw attention to a document authored by him in 1946, which aimed at resolving the political deadlock over India's constitutional future, by presenting a solution acceptable to both the Congress and the Muslim League.


 3 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















