






























Constitution Day Quiz 2021 - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Constitution Day Quiz 2021


 



Quiz
Constitution Day Quiz 2021
Varsha Nair









										26 Nov																			

2021


Quiz



 Venue
Virtual


Share








To celebrate Constitution Day, the constitutionofindia.net team collaborated with Qshala to conduct an exciting virtual quiz on the Constitution, on 26 November 2021 from 7:15 pm to 8:30 pm

Around 300 participants belonging to different ages and regions, ranging from college students to school students, took part in the quiz.

The quiz had three rounds—the Constitution of India round, the Connect round and the Rapid Fire round and it comprised four kinds of questions—type answer questions, puzzle questions, direct questions and true/false questions. Scores were calculated based on speed and accuracy of answers, and the top 10 scorers were declared as winners. Winners were awarded a prize package curated by us that included lapel pins, a T-Shirt, postcards, stickers and a bookmark.
The constitutionofindia.net team thanks all the participants for having taken out the time to participate and for having shown great enthusiasm and spirit throughout the duration of the quiz. The team looks forward to conducting many more such events to continue spreading constitutional awareness among students.
You can click on the link below to watch the virtual quiz. Learn a little about our Constitution and see how many questions you can get the right answer to!


Resources
Link to Quiz: VIRTUAL QUIZ



Suggested Reading


B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights



Independence: A Tale of Two Declarations



B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights






More in events





 Quiz



ConQuest: India’s Premier National Quiz on the Indian Constitution, History and Politics
 All over India



Event Report


01 Oct
2016







 Quiz



Constitution Day Campaign | Kozhikode | Mock Parliament and Quiz
 Kozhikode



Event Report


23 Jan
2023


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















