






























S. Nijalingappa - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										S. Nijalingappa


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
S. Nijalingappa
1902 - 2000




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Kannada
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Siddavanahalli Nijalingappa was born into a peasant family on 10 December 1902, in the village of Haluvagalu in Bellary district. He graduated from Central College, Bangalore in 1924, and went on to get a degree in law from the Law College at Poona in 1926. He was married in 1927 to Murugamma, and subsequently started practicing law in both Davanagere and Chitradurga.
Role in the Independence Movement
As a young man, Nijalingappa was attracted by personalities like Mahatma Gandhi and Rajendra Prasad, and began attending Congress sessions. He was elected as the President of the Chitradurga District Congress Committee in 1936, beginning his political career in earnest. For participating in the Forest Satyagraha of 1939 in Mysore, Nijalingappa lost his bar license.
The anti-Congress Mysore Praja Paksh dominated politics in the Princely State of Mysore. Nijalingappa is credited with building up the Congress movement here. He was elected to the Mysore Representative Assembly from Chitradurga in 1937. He also served as the President of the Mysore Congress Working Committee from 1938 to 1950.
Contribution to Constitution making
S. Nijalingappa was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bombay through a Congress Party ticket. He did not actively participate in the Assembly.
Later Contributions
Nijalingappa had a prominent political career in Karnataka and at the national level as well. He was appointed as the President of the Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee, with the mandate of resolving the factional issues in the state. He was elected to the Lok Sabha from Chitradurga constituency in 1952.
After the formation of the linguistic state of Mysore in 1956, Nijalingappa resigned from Parliament to become its first Chief Minister. He went through several ups and downs in the state’s politics for the next decade or so, involving factional conflicts with B.D. Jatti that saw him ousted from the Chief Minister’s post in 1958, and even losing the Assembly elections in 1962. But he bounced back by winning a by-election three months later, and became the Chief Minister of the state for the third time. Through his multiple tenures as Chief Minister, Nijalingappa is remembered for completing the Sharavathy hydroelectric project, improving irrigation facilities in the northern Karnataka, and for his supportive role in settling thousands of Tibetan refugees in the state in 1956.
In 1968, Nijalingappa moved on to national level politics and was appointed as the President of the All-India Congress Committee. His tenure was to prove highly eventful, with the Syndicate faction within the Congress party openly clashing with Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. There were larger differences on economic policy and the struggle between the organisational and governmental wings of the party. But matters eventually came to a head on the issue of rivalling candidates for the 1969 Presidential elections.
The official Congress candidate, as supported by the Syndicate, was Neelam Sanjiva Reddy. Nijalingappa issued a whip instructing all Congress legislators to vote for him, but the Prime Minister refused to endorse him publicly. Instead, she asked for a ‘vote of conscience’. To the embarrassment of the Syndicate, V.V. Giri was elected as the President.
Continuing the power struggle, the Prime Minister dismissed 4 Ministers considered close to the Syndicate. In response, Nijalingappa removed two of her close aides from the Congress Working Committee. The Working Committee further expelled Indira Gandhi from the party for ‘indiscipline’ a month later. But the Congress Parliamentary Party was firmly behind Gandhi by now, and the Congress party was split in two. Nijalingappa continued to lead the Congress (O) faction, which merged with the Janata Party in 1977. He gradually retreated from active politics, and quit the Janata Party in 1983.
He passed away on 8 August 2000, at the age of 97.


 



Resources



Who’s Who: 1952 (Parliament Secratariat, 1952)
A Congressman from another age by S. Muralidharan and Ravi Sharma (Frontline, 2000)
The Congress in India—Crisis and Split by Robert L. Hardgrave (Asian Survey, 1970)
S. Nijalingappa by Department of Information and Public Relations, Government of Karnataka
My Life and Politics: An Autobiography by S. Nijalingappa (Vision Books, 2000)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















