






























The British Game of Sovereignty - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										The British Game of Sovereignty


 
















The British Game of Sovereignty



Blog



Tanya Kini






20 December 2022

Share









 
									England and Wales faced off against each other in the 2022 FIFA Men's World Cup, despite being a part of a single sovereign state.
Image credit: RNZ								

On 30 November, 2022 at the Ahmad bin Ali stadium in Qatar, England and Wales took to the grass field to play the final Group B fixture at the 2022 FIFA Men’s World Cup. England dispatched their neighbours with a 3-0 score line and secured qualification to the Round of 16 knockout stage. Wales, on the other hand, experienced disappointment in only their second time at the World Cup.
Now casual sports fans may be wondering—why were England and Wales playing as separate British teams in the 2022 World Cup, when they typically played under the united banner of ‘Great Britain’ at the Olympics?
The United Kingdom is a sovereign state made up of four countries: England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Though they are united under a single system of government, each of these countries have a degree of autonomy and self-governance. This arrangement, often referred to as the “British Union”, ensures that these countries are united under a single monarch (King Charles III) and a single parliamentary system.
Team Great Britain fielded a men’s football team that had players who represented both England and Wales at the international level.Image credit: Wikimedia Commons
So what allows England and Wales to compete against each other in the 2022 FIFA Men’s World Cup, despite being a part of a single sovereign state?
The idea of “sport sovereignty“, allows some political entities to maintain and compete in international competitions, with their own separate national teams. Special exemptions in FIFA’s laws recognises sports sovereignty and permits its exercise in the football World Cup.
The concept of “sport sovereignty” reflects the complex and multifaceted nature of the UK’s constitutional arrangements. While the countries of the UK are united under a single system of government, their constituent countries of Northern Ireland, Wales, and Scotland have a certain degree of autonomy in sporting matters. This arrangement allows each country to retain its own cultural identity and national pride, even as it is part of the larger entity of the UK.
This autonomy is not absolute and is subject to the overall sovereignty of the UK parliament. The three acts of the UK Parliament that began devolution in these three countries limits their autonomy to sporting matters with a list of other specific matters. The UK remains a Sovereign State and the devolved governments of Northern Ireland, Wales, and Scotland do not have the power to secede from the union or make decisions on matters outside of their jurisdiction. The concept of sport sovereignty is not formally recognized in UK constitutional law and is not a basis for further devolution of powers or independence from the union.
The Scottish referendum in 2014 saw a slight majority vote ‘No’ to independence from the UK, but the threat continues to loom over the British Union. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons
Many argue that this neat compartmentalisation of sport and political sovereignty might not stand. The recent political jostling around the Scottish independence referendum shows that there is still a lot of flux and uncertainty with regards to the federal arrangements of the UK. Commenting on Scotland’s decision to also exclude themselves from the 2012 London Olympics team, Stefan Szymanski, the co-author of ‘Soccernomics’, speculates that “the Scottish team are liable to increase their demands for independence should a Great Britain football team ever be fielded”.
This of course has not happened yet. However, sports sovereignty may play a key part in the future of Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales and England as they navigate and negotiate their future relationships with the United Kingdom and Europe.








Suggested Reading


5 Essential Writings on Constitution Making










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Chileans Overwhelmingly Reject a New Progressive Constitution

12 September 2022
												• By Vineeth Krishna

In September 2022, the Chilean population voted to reject the Draft of a new Chilean Constitution. What does the rejection of a highly progressive draft constitution mean for future constitution-making projects?


 4 mins										




 

Distribution of Wealth: The Unfulfilled Vision of the Constitution’s Framers

24 January 2023
												• By Tanya Kini

The gap between India’s rich and poor continues to grow at an alarming rate, as evidenced by a recent report from Oxfam India. What did our Constitution framers think was the best way to combat wealth inequality?


 2 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















