






























Article 220: Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part VI

Article
220



Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge

No person who, after the commencement of this Constitution, has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court shall plead or act in any court or before any authority in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “High Court” does not include a High Court for a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule as it existed before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956.



 
 

Version 1




Article 196, Draft Constitution 1948
No person who has held office-
(a) As a judge of a High Court, or
(b) As an additional judge or temporary judge of a High Court on having been recruited from the Bar,
shall plead or act in any Court or before any authority within the territory of India.




Version 2


Article 220, Constitution of India 1950
No person who has held office as a Judge of a High Court after the commencement of this Constitution shall plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.




Summary


Draft Article 196 (Article 220) was debated on 7 June 1949. It prevented Judges of a High Court from pleading before any court or authority in India.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee suggested to wholly replace the Draft Article with the following:
‘No person who has held office as a judge of a High Court after the commencement of this Constitution shall plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.’
The amendment simplified the Draft Article so that it applied only to permanent Judges of the High Court who held the office after the commencement of the Constitution. The debates in the Assembly were based on this amendment.
A member of the Constituent Assembly suggested that the words ‘within the territory of India’ be substituted for ‘within the jurisdiction of that High Court’. Another member echoed this sentiment, arguing that to prohibit those judges who had served even temporarily in a High Court from ever appearing again before any court in the country was unwarranted and undemocratic. He argued that it would be more fair to preclude a former judge from appearing in that High Court where he held office, but that this prohibition should not extend to the whole of India. This amendment was rejected.
Another member proposed that the words ‘after the commencement of the Constitution’ be removed from this article, to prevent those who have been judges at any time to not be allowed to practice at the Bar. He argued that this principle is firmly entrenched in other jurisdiction including in England. He made several arguments in support of the Article, including the dignity of the High Court, and issues of special relations that they might have cultivated as a result of their positions.
The amendment proposed by the Chairman of the Drafting Committee was accepted by the Assembly. All other amendments were rejected. The amended Draft Article was adopted on 7 June 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















