






























Govind Ballabh Pant - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Govind Ballabh Pant


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Govind Ballabh Pant
1887 - 1961




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Minorities 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Govind Ballabh Pant was born on 10 September 1887 in Almora, Uttarakhand. He attended the Muir Central College and Law College, Allahabad. He was inspired as a student by the movement against the partition of Bengal and went to attend the annual Congress session at Kashi in 1905.
Pant enrolled as an advocate at the Allahabad High Court in 1909. He settled down in Nainital where he soon rose to become the leader of the Bar. As a young lawyer, he helped a village council in Kashipur in 1914 in challenging a law that required locals to provide free transportation to British officials.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Pant started the Kumaon Parishad in 1916 and was elected to the All-India Congress Committee, soon becoming actively involved in Congress politics. He got elected to the United Provinces Legislative Council on a Swaraj Party ticket in 1923,
When the Simon Commission came to India to study and recommend constitutional reforms in 1928, it was boycotted by almost all Indian political factions because of its all-white composition. Pant participated in a protest against it in Lucknow, where the police brutally lathi-charged the protesters. As a result of this attack, he was left with a permanent disability.
Pant was elected as the President of the United Province Provincial Congress Committee in 1926 and went on to become a part of the National Working Committee in 1946. He was made a member of the Congress Working Committee in 1931, drawing him close to the national high command. In 1937, he went became the Prime Minister of the United Province until all the Congress ministries resigned in 1939 to protest against India’s forced involvement in the Second World War.
Pant took part in the Salt March and the Quit India Movement. He was one of several leaders preemptively arrested in 1930 for planning the Civil Disobedience Movement, and then again in 1933, 1940, and 1942.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Pant was elected to the Constituent Assembly from United Province. In the Assembly, he spoke on separate electorates, citizenship, the right to property, and federalism.
Later Contributions
Pant was the first Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, leading the state for almost a decade up till 1955. He then went on to serve as the Home Minister in the Nehru Cabinet from 1955 until his death in 1961. He received India’s highest civilian honour, the Bharat Ratna, in 1957.


 



Key Speeches



Pant argued vehemently against separate electorates for minority communities.
He wanted the states to have greater autonomy and was against the centralization of power.
During debates around the fundamental right to property, he spoke against Zamindari system, while accepting the need for a fair compensation.



 



Resources



Selected Works of Govind Ballabh Pant, Vol. 1-18, edited by B.R. Nanda (Oxford University Press, 1994)
Govind Ballabh Pant: The True Gandhian, by S.R. Bakshi (South Asia Books, 1992)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















