






























Brajeshwar Prasad - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Brajeshwar Prasad


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Brajeshwar Prasad
1911 - 1979




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Brajeshwar Prasad was born on 22 October 1911, in Patna, Bihar to Shri Rai Brindaban Prasad and Smt. Sampurna Rani. He pursued law at Patna Law College and later set up the Civil Liberties Union (Gaya) in 1937. Prasad was interested in agriculture and was the founding member of Khetihar Mazdoor Sangh.
He started his political journey as the founder of the Gaya Youth League and he was appointed as its vice president. Prasad later became the Municipal commissioner for Gaya and served as the President of Town Congress Committee in 1945.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
He was an eminent freedom fighter and he enthusiastically participated in Indian National Congress’s national movements. He was involved in the Quit India Movement in 1942 and other national movements till 1944. He was also imprisoned for taking part in such movements. 
Prasad followed Gandhian values. He wrote to Sardar Patel stating that Godse must not be executed. He stated, “It will be befitting Gandhiji’s memory to pardon this scoundrel along with others who have been sentenced. They should forcibly made to settle down in the Andamans as free man…”
Contribution to Constitution making
He was elected as a Constituent Assembly member from Gaya(Bihar) on a Congress party ticket. He contributed to discussions on citizenship, the preamble, Centre-State relations, and public health.
Rejecting the use of Mahatma Gandhi’s name in the Constitution of India, he stated, “..it is not a Gandhian Constitution. The foundation stones of this Constitution are the decisions of the American Supreme Court. It is the Government of India Act, 1935, repeated again… I do not want that the name of Mahatma Gandhi should be dragged in the rotten Constitution.” 
Later Contributions
He was elected to the Provisional Parliament (1950-52). Later, he was elected to the first Lok Sabha (1952-57) and for a second term (1957-62). Prasad also had a special interest in foreign affairs and was a staunch proponent of the world state.
 


 



Key Speeches



He opposed the inclusion of the term ‘sovereign’ in the preamble and sought to include more pragmatic ideals. He proposed the use of the ‘socialist‘ in the Preamble and the Constituent Assembly rejected the same. 
He was a proponent of ensuring the principles of the Constitution of India are upheld. In relation to the citizenship of Muslims migrating from Pakistan, he stated, “It is only by a strict adherence to certain moral principles that nations progress… I see no reason why a Muslim who is a citizen of this country should be deprived of his citizenship at the commencement of this Constitution..“
He suggested that upon a conflict between two states or Centre and State, the decision of the Centre should prevail, as against vesting the power with the Supreme Court. He believed in a unitary and federal system of governance, instead of a parliamentary form of government. 
He urged that the provinces must not have autonomous powers and should have only concurrent powers.
He proposed the All-India Public Services Commission, instead of State Commissions, and that Civil Servants should be for the entire country, so as to prevent misuse of authority by the states.
He recommended that all tribal areas be integrated and placed under an autonomous body set up by the Central Government. He did not want the respective state governments to govern the same. 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















