






























Desk Brief: The Constituent Assembly on Retired Judges Taking Up Executive Office - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: The Constituent Assembly on Retired Judges Taking Up Executive Office


 
















Desk Brief: The Constituent Assembly on Retired Judges Taking Up Executive Office



Blog



Editorial Team






19 July 2022

Share









 
									Image Credit: Wikimedia Commons								

In 2022, a whopping eight Supreme Court Judges will hang up their gowns. If trends in the last decade are anything to go by, many of these Judges won’t simply retreat into retirement. They will, most likely, receive post-retirement positions, often put their way by the government in power.
Former Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi’s nomination to Rajya Sabha by the ruling party in 2020 had stirred the debate over post-retirement positions. Many saw this appointment as a blot on judicial independence. Similar concerns were advanced during our Constitution’s framing, where the problematic link between judicial independence and post-retirement positions was emphasized.
On 7 June 1949, K.T. Shah moved a proposal in the Constituent Assembly to include a provision in the Constitution that barred former Supreme Court and High Court Judges from being appointed to any executive office under the Union or the State. He believed that this measure would protect judicial independence and maintain the separation of powers.
Shah reminded the Assembly that in the past, the Executive had attempted to influence judicial officers with attractive executive postings. He predicted this could get worse in independent India, which, unlike colonial India, would have more positions available. He dismissed precedent and convention as sufficient measures. Shah felt that the problem was critical enough to warrant specific mention in the Constitution.
H.V. Kamath and Shibban Lal Saxena supported Shah’s proposal. Kamath said:
‘…the Supreme Court in our country will have to arbitrate and adjudicate upon disputes-constitutional disputes between the Centre and the Units as well as between Unit and Unit. The Executive is interested in many of these questions and it is very likely-more often than not-that a particular matter which is coming up before the Supreme Court may be of such vital importance and interest to the President or the Executive that they might like the Supreme Court to give a particular decision upon that matter…’
Drafting Committee Chairman B.R. Ambedkar was not convinced. He argued that
‘…The judiciary to a very large extent is not concerned with the executive: it is concerned with the adjudication of the right of the people and to some extent of the rights of the Government of India and the Units as such…the opportunity for the executive to influence the judiciary is very small and it seems to me that purely for a theoretical reason to disqualify people from holding other offices is to carry the thing too far…’
He continued that unlike in the United Kingdom, where Judges retire at 70, and in the United States where Judges hold office until death, Indian Judges are made to retire at a relatively early age of 60 with a low pension. Therefore, barring opportunities for retired judges to hold office would not be ideal and placed ‘too many burdens on the members who accept a post in the judiciary’
After Ambedkar’s intervention, the Assembly dropped Shah’s proposal.
Curiously, Ambedkar did not directly address Shah’s core concern: a sitting Judge might act in ways to obtain a post-retirement position from the Executive. It is striking that he believed that the Executive would have no interest in meddling with judicial affairs. He was not convinced by Shah’s warning that the erstwhile Government’s attempt to influence the Judiciary would repeat in independent India. Ambedkar appears to have not anticipated that the Judiciary and Executive would interact in complex and worrying ways that had the potential to compromise the separation of powers and judicial independence, most starkly represented by the Emergency.

Tags Supreme Court of IndiaIndian Judiciary 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















