






























1946 | B. R. Ambedkar on the Muslim League's Absence from the Constituent Assembly - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Museum
								 ≫ 
										1946 | B. R. Ambedkar on the Muslim League’s Absence from the Constituent Assembly


 
















 1946 | B. R. Ambedkar on the Muslim League’s Absence from the Constituent Assembly



							Date: December 17, 1946						

Location: Constituent Assembly of India



 
							Audio						





Credits: Prasar Bharati Archives



This audio clip features B.R. Ambedkar’s speech from 17 December 1946 in the Constituent Assembly, shedding light on a tumultuous period in India’s history when the Objectives Resolution was under discussion. His intervention was part of the Assembly’s deliberations on whether it was appropriate to pass the resolution in the absence of the Muslim League.
The majority of the Constituent Assembly members were from the Congress or the Muslim League. However, their differences on the issue of Independent India’s federal structure would ultimately lead to the breakdown of the fragile compromise between the two parties and push the League to demand a separate nation-state. As a result, the League declared an official boycott of the Constituent Assembly on 22 November 1946. In this situation, the Assembly had to consider whether it was justified to pass the Objectives Resolution. By listening to this archival audio clip, you can understand Dr. Ambedkar’s stance on the issue.









Suggested Reading


This Month in Constitution-Making (November 1946): Was The Constituent Assembly Valid Despite Muslim League Absence?



This Month in Constitution-Making (January 1947): The Constituent Assembly passes the Objectives Resolution









More from the museum





 


1946 | Constituent Assembly Debates
This 10 minute audio recording captures a part of the Constituent Assembly proceedings from 19 December 1946. The voices of Assembly members, Rajendra Prasad (Chairman), Frank Anthony, Jawaharlal Nehru, Kiran Shankar Roy, B.G.Kher and Syama Prasad Mookherjee are heard here.



 
											Audio										





 


Jawaharlal Nehru Introducing the Objectives Resolution in the Constituent Assembly
December 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru addressing the Constituent Assembly while moving the Objectives Resolution.



 
											Photo Archive										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















