






























Desk Brief: The Day We Adopted Our Constitution - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: The Day We Adopted Our Constitution


 
















Desk Brief: The Day We Adopted Our Constitution



Blog



Editorial Team






26 November 2021

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

Exactly 72 years ago, on 26 November 1949, Sardar Patel had some good news to share with his colleagues in the Constituent Assembly:
‘I am glad to inform the House that all the nine States specified in Part B of the First Schedule of the Constitution, including the State of Hyderabad, have signified, in the manner indicated in my statement made on October 12th, their acceptance of the Constitution which the House is now going to adopt.‘
Part B of the First Schedule listed the former Princely States who had joined the Indian Union. These States now confirmed that they were ready to accept an Indian Constitution that the Assembly was about to adopt.
Over the past couple of sittings, the Assembly President Rajendra Prasad had been moderating Assembly discussions in which members, for the last time in the constitution-making process, had a chance to air their opinions, and concerns and reflect on the Constitution that they had drafted. Today, it was Prasad’s turn.
As Prasad was about to speak, he had to deal with some interruptions. B. Das wanted to know if there was going to be an announcement about ‘Vande Mataram’ as India’s national song and added: ‘…what would be our national anthem?’. Prasad responded that a decision would be taken in January. More interruptions followed – Algu Rai Shastri and R.V. Dhulekar wanted Assembly members to adopt and sign a Hindi-translated version of the Constitution.
Prasad reminded Shastri that the Assembly had decided that English would be the language of official use for the next 15 years and that he will work towards getting a Hindi translation ready by 26 January 1950. Responding to Dhulekhar, he said that the signing of a translated Hindi version of the Indian Constitution can only happen after the Constituent Assembly authenticated the translation – which wouldn’t be possible before 26 January 1950.
After seeing off these interruptions, Prasad finally began his speech. He laid out the challenges that the framers of the Constitution had to take into account:
‘…The countries of Europe have never been able to join together or coalesce even in a Confederacy, much less under one unitary Government. Here, in spite of the size of the population and the country, we have succeeded in framing a Constitution which covers the whole of it…’
He briefly recalled key moments in the constitution-making process including the Objectives Resolution and the setting up of various Assembly Committees. He also provided some interesting trivia: the expenses incurred in the constitution-making process as of 22 November 1949 was Rs. 63, 96, 729 and the number of visitors who watched the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly from the Gallery was 53,000.
Jawaharlal Nehru addressing the Constituent Assembly in 1946. Image credits: Wikimedia Commons
Prasad was happy with most parts of the Constitution but regretted that the Constitution did not lay down any qualifications for a member of the legislature. Further, he would have liked the Constitution to be written in an ‘Indian‘ language.
He ended his remarks by thanking individuals part of the constitution-making process including the members of the Drafting Committee, Secretariat, and support staff.
Then, the moment had finally arrived:
‘President: It now remains to put the motion which was moved by Dr. Ambedkar, to the vote of the House. The question is:
“That the Constitution as settled by the Assembly be passed.”
The motion was adopted
(Prolonged Cheers)’
It was at this moment that we the people of India adopted our Constitution.
Watch – The Making of India’s Constitution | Get Your Preamble T-shirt | Register for Constitution Day Quiz!

Tags Indian Constituent Assembly 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















