






























Article 371: Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part XXI

Article
371



Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat

(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by order made with respect to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat, provide for any special responsibility of the Governor for—
(a) the establishment of separate development boards for Vidarbha, Marathwada, and the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case may be, Saurashtra, Kutch and the rest of Gujarat with the provision that a report on the working of each of these boards will be placed each year before the State Legislative Assembly;
(b) the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole; and
(c) an equitable arrangement providing adequate facilities for technical education and vocational training, and adequate opportunities
for employment in services under the control of the State Government, in respect of all the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole.



 
 

VERSION 1




Article 371, Constitution of India 1950
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, during a period of ten years from the commencement thereof, or during such longer or shorter period as Parliament may by law provide in respect of any State, the Government of every State specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall be under the general control of, and comply with such particular directions, if any, as may from time to time be given by, the President:
⁠Provided that the President may by order direct that the provisions of this article shall not apply to any State specified in the order.




SUMMARY


Draft Article 306B (Article 371, Constitution of India 1950) was debated in the Constituent Assembly on 13 October 1949. It declared that for a period of ten years after the Constitution was introduced, the Government of every State mentioned in Part III of First Schedule of the Draft Constitution 1948 would be under the general control and supervision of the Central Government. The Draft Article further specified that a failure of any State to abide by these provisions would be taken as a failure of the State to act in accordance with the Constitution.  
Many Members welcomed the provisions of the Draft Article. One Member wanted the power of central control and supervision of the States to continue beyond ten years and be extended for an indefinite period. He believed that ten years was not sufficient time to solve the problems of the States. A few Members noted the stark difference in the conditions of the Provinces and the States as an indication that the Draft Article was necessary. They argued that the States were administratively and politically less experienced than the Provinces.  
One Member added that the Draft Article was a preventive measure that would allow the Centre to intervene in the administration of States if extraordinary circumstances were to arise. Another Member also cautioned the Assembly to the fact that many of these States were border States and considering the troubled relationship India shared with Pakistan, it would make sense to have greater central vigilance of these States.  
One Member opposed the differential treatment meted out to the States in relation to the Provinces and claimed that the Draft Article went against democratic principles. According to him, the subordination of the States to the authority of the Centre meant that bureaucratic rule would dominate over any actual representative government in these States. Another Member echoed this sentiment, insisting that people of the States had always fought for a common Constitution assuming that “there would be no differentiation between the Provinces and States”. This Member was ready to accept the provisions of the Article for the overall stability of the country, but insisted that not all States in Part III of First Schedule should be brought under the provisions of the Draft Article. 
Though multiple amendments were introduced in the Assembly, none were accepted. The Draft Article was adopted as a part of the Constitution on 13 October 1949. 
Subsequent Parliamentary Acts including constitutional amendments such as the Constitutional Amendment Act, 1956 and Constitutional Amendment Act, 1973 replaced Article 371 with a new Article and made significant changes to its provisions.  


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















