






























Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar
1883 - 1953




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Chairman: 
Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas 
Member: Committee on the Rules of ProcedureAdvisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas+1 moreSub-Committee on Fundamental Rights 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar was born on 14th May 1883 in Pudur village, Andhra Pradesh. He studied history at Madras Christian College and obtained a B.L. degree after attending classes during his free time. During his time at Madras Christian College, he was appointed as a tutor of history after exhibiting great competence.
He became a prominent member of the Bar and was appointed as the Advocate-General of Madras State from 1929 to 1944 at the age of 45. He was also made the Dewan Bahadur in 1930. In 1932 he got knighted in the New Year Honours List. However, he surrendered the Knighthood. He was a renowned jurist and was appointed to the Government of India Committee to amend the law of Partnership and Sale of Goods 1929. Ayyar was very encouraging of new lawyers, and he kept his library open for anyone to access.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Ayyar did not have an active political career and was not involved in India’s freedom struggle. He was a full-time advocate when he was appointed to the Constituent Assembly.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ayyar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras province from a Congress party ticket. In the Assembly, he played a critical role and was part of nine Committees including the Drafting Committee, Advisory Committee, and the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights. He made important interventions in the debates on citizenship, fundamental rights, and the proclamation of emergency.
Later Contributions
After his tenure at the Constituent Assembly, he retired from public life.
Ayyar died on 3rd October 1953.
Alladi Kuppuswami, son of Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar, instituted ‘The Alladi Memorial Trust’ in 1983 in honour of the birth centenary of his father. This trust conducts lectures on topics relating to Constitutional law.


 



Key Speeches



Ayyar made important interventions while discussing citizenship provisions, explaining to the Assembly the different choices before them and the pros and cons of each.
He argued for restrictions to Article 19, stating that freedom should be contingent on State security.
Taking examples from American history, he defended the Indian President’s emergency powers under the Draft Constitution.



 



Resources



A Statesman Among Jurists by Alladi Kuppuswami (Bombay : Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1993).
Legal Luminary by V.S. Ravi (The Hindu, 2003)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















