






























A.T. Pillai - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										A.T. Pillai


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
A.T. Pillai
1885 - 1970




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Travancore-Cochin
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Malayalam
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Thanu Pillai was born on 15 July 1885 in Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala. A. He graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree and taught at a school in Thiruvananthapuram. Subsequently, he was appointed as Deputy Chief in the State Agriculture department while studying law and teaching simultaneously. After receiving his law degree he practiced as an advocate in Thiruvananthapuram. During this time, Pillai took part in protests against police brutality and actively spoke against British rule. Later, he abandoned legal practice to join the Indian National Congress.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
There isn’t enough information about Pillai’s participation in the independence movement. However, considering his position as State Congress President for nearly 14 years (from 1938), it is plausible that he had some role in Congress’s freedom movement activities.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Pillai joined the Constituent Assembly as a representative of the Princely State of Travancore. In the Assembly, he spoke on matters relating to federalism.
Later Contributions
After India gained independence, he served as the first Prime Minister of Tranvancore’s newly democratic government and was a member of the Travancore Legislative Assembly (1949-1956). He was elected as the Chief Minister of Travancore-Kochi between 1954-1955. Due to differences in opinion, Pillai left the Congress in 1954 and joined the Praja Socialist Party.
A few years after Travancore merged with districts of Malabar to form the new state of Kerala, Pillai was elected as the Chief Minister of Kerala (1960-1962).
Later, he served as the Governor of Punjab (1962-1964) and the Governor of Andhra Pradesh (1964-1968).
He passed away on 27 July 1970.


 



Key Speeches



Pillai’s contributed to the debates around the division of power between States and the Union. In one such intervention, he was concerned about the Draft Constitution placing ‘lands, minerals and other things of value’ under the Union control.
He wanted Parliament to adopt progressive laws that were already in operation in the States.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















