






























Chaudary Ranbir Singh - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Chaudary Ranbir Singh


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Chaudary Ranbir Singh
1914 - 2009




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Patiala and East Punjab States Union
Religion: Sikh
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Punjabi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Chaudhary Ranbir Singh was born on 26 November 1914 at Sanghi in Haryana. He completed his schooling in Vaish High School, Rohtak and graduated from Ramjas College, Delhi in the 1930s. 
He was the founder-editor of the weekly Hindi Haryana and headed the Haryana Vidya Parcharani Sabha in Rohtak.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Singh played an active part in the Indian independence movement. He was detained twice and arrested four times for his participation in movements initiated by Congress. He was one of the leaders responsible for propagating and leading the Satyagraha and Quit India movement in Rohtak, Haryana. 
He worked on promoting education and agriculture. He established the Subhash High School, Kherkanda and Primary School, and the Gandhi Memorial High School, Gorarh in the 1940s. Singh served as the Secretary of the Bharat Kisan Samiti.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Singh was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Punjab in 1946 on a Congress party ticket. He intervened in a variety of issues such as Delhi’s provincial autonomy, minimum economic price of agricultural produce, and Profession Tax.
Later Contributions
Singh had a prolific political career and is the only person to have served as a member of seven different legislative houses including the Constituent Assembly and Provincial Legislature. He was successfully elected to the Lok Sabha in 1952 and 1957. Singh was subsequently elected to the Punjab State Legislature in 1962, the Haryana State Legislature in 1966, and Rajya Sabha in 1972.
During his term as a State legislator, Singh held several cabinet positions, including minister of power and irrigation for Punjab in 1962 and minister for the Public Works Department for Haryana in 1966. His notable contribution during his time in office as Punjab’s Irrigation Minister was the development of the Bakhra Nangal Power Project. He also served as the President of the Haryana Pradesh Congress Committee between 1977 and 1980. 
He passed away on 1 February 2009. 


 



Key Speeches



While discussing Delhi’s provincial autonomy, Singh stated that while it was justified for New Delhi to be classified as a province given its special position as the seat of the Union government, he did not believe that the same provincial status should be extended to the other parts of Delhi such as Old Delhi and certain rural parts of New Delhi.
Singh proposed the introduction of a new article in the Constitution that laid stress on the State’s duty to secure a minimum economic price for agricultural produce, claiming that in the absence of such a price, agriculturalists would be susceptible to exploitation. 
He emphasized the need to increase the upper limit of the Profession Tax in order to institute a fair system of taxation that was not partial to the rich.



 



Resources



Making of our Constitution: Speeches of Ch. Ranbir Singh in the Constituent Assembly of India (2009).
Freedom Struggle in Haryana and Chaudhary Ranbir Singh,BD Yadav.
Chaudhary Ranbir Singh: A Short Biography.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















