






























Krishnamoorthy Rao - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Krishnamoorthy Rao


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Krishnamoorthy Rao
1902 - 1968




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Mysore
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Kannada
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao was born on 15 November 1902 in Shimoga, Mysore State. He received his Bachelor of Science degree from Central College, Mysore University and later graduated with a law degree from Law College, Poona, Bombay University.
Rao started the National Educational Society at Shimoga which ran multiple high schools and middle schools.
He worked with many civil society organisations. He was a member of the Executive Committee of the Kannada Sahitya Parishad, Bangalore (1937-1947) as well as the Planning Committee for Industries and Commerce, Mysore (1945-1948) to name a few.
Rao was elected to the Mysore Representative Assembly (1945-1949). He was also extremely well travelled. Rao visited Japan, Australia, Indonesia, Canada and USA, amongst many other countries, during his life.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Rao was imprisoned for 18 months in connection with the 1942 Quit India movement and took part in the Mysore Struggle – a movement that demanded responsible government for Mysore. He was an active member of the Congress Party’s political pursuits while simultaneously practising as an advocate.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Rao represented the princely state of Mysore in the Constituent Assembly. He had a distinct view about the role of Hindi in Indian public life and spoke on topics concerning the financial relationship between the Union and the States.
Later Contributions
Rao led a vibrant public life and was a member of several Ministry constituted committees including the Standing Committee for Finance and External Affairs, Oilseeds Committee, and the State Trading Committee (1950-1951). He was also on the Panel of Chairmen in the Provisional Parliament of India.
Rao was the first Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha (31 May 1952- 1 March 1962). He also served as a Deputy Speaker in the Lok Sabha from 1962.
He passed away on 18 November 1968, at the age of 66.
Key Writings
Rao had multiple publications under his name. Some of them include translations of Satyagraha in South Africa by Gandhiji, To The Women by Gandhiji, Discovery of India by Jawaharlal Nehru, Letters from Delhi and Life of Louis Pasteur in Kannada and The Leftist Experiment in English.


 



Key Speeches



Rao wanted Hindi to be a compulsory subject in all High schools. He argued that Hindi was an extremely fluid language and wanted a commission to review the use of Hindi in different parts of the country to standardize words and expressions.
He felt that Hindi should be declared as the common language of India. He further stated that an academy should be set up to develop the language so it was acceptable to all of India.
Rao wanted India’s financial policies to promote the development of States: he argued that trade, businesses and other industries started by State governments that were critical to States’ revenue should not be taxed.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















