






























Part XVI Archives - Constitution of India






















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII







 
Part XVI
Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes
Part XVI of the Constitution contains special provisions for certain classes, including Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and other Socially and Educationally Backward Classes.
Read More 


 





ARTICLES 330 TO 342A








Article 330: Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People


Article 331: Representation of the Anglo-Indian Community in the House of the People


Article 332: Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States


Article 333: Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the Legislative Assemblies of the States


Article 334: Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after certain period


Article 335: Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services and posts


Article 336: Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain services


Article 337: Special provision with respect to educational grants for the benefit of Anglo-Indian community


Article 338: National Commission for Scheduled Castes


Article 338A: National Commission for Scheduled Tribes


Article 338B: National Commission for Backward Classes


Article 339: Control of the Union over the administration of Scheduled Areas and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes


Article 340: Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes


Article 341: Scheduled Castes


Article 342: Scheduled Tribes


Article 342A: Socially and educationally backward classes





 
 



 
More About Part XVI: Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes

Part XVI of the Constitution contains special provisions for certain classes, including Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and other Socially and Educationally Backward Classes. These provisions take the form of representation in legislatures, reservation in services and posts, and the setting up of National Commissions to look into the implementation of these provisions and other safeguards.




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















