






























How Did B.R. Ambedkar and M.K. Gandhi Imagine Indian Federalism? - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										How Did B.R. Ambedkar and M.K. Gandhi Imagine Indian Federalism?


 

















 





Video




 




How Did B.R. Ambedkar and M.K. Gandhi Imagine Indian Federalism?

October 17, 2022






B.R. Ambedkar and M.K. Gandhi spoke and wrote widely on a number of matters. Their contrasting views on the caste system, have garnered wide attention. Relatively less attention however, has been paid to comparing other strands of their constitutional vision for India. In this video, we compare their views on an important constitutional design feature: Federalism.
Transcript
B.R. Ambedkar and M.K. Gandhi wrote and spoke widely on their political, social and economic visions for India. Their contrasting views on the caste system, particularly its role in the Indian future, have garnered wide attention. And rightly so, as both saw caste in dramatically different ways.
Relatively less attention however, is paid to comparing other strands of their constitutional vision for India.
In this video, we briefly compare Ambedkar and Gandhi on an important constitutional design feature – federalism. To do this, we take up two key documents. Ambedkar’s States and Minorities: a mini-constitution drafted by him on behalf of the Scheduled Castes Federation in 1945. As for Gandhi, we consider the Gandhian Constitution for Free India. Gandhian economist S.N. Agarwal published this document in 1946, and obtained a full endorsement from Gandhi himself.
While Ambedkar thought of the states as the fundamental political and administrative units, Gandhi saw villages in the same role.
Ambedkar wanted India to be a federation along the lines of the USA, even calling it the United States of India. States were conceived as viable financial and administrative units, which could not be divided or distorted once they entered the Indian Union. Their exact political structure is not delineated, but the extensive duties of a ‘Qualified State’ laid out in Article 1 itself indicates the wide-ranging autonomy to be granted.
The Gandhian Constitution on the other hand, preferred an extreme form of decentralisation. All political power would flow up from the basic unit of the village. There was to be as much devolution of power to the local levels as possible. This included responsibility for school education, policing, village industries, markets, taxation and justice.
When the Draft Constitution of 1948 was presented in the Constituent Assembly for discussion, Gandhian members were surprised to see no mention of the village. They sharply criticised this omission as un-Indian. Replying to these critics, Ambedkar did not mince his words, describing the village as a sink of localism and a den of ignorance. This generated heated responses from the Gandhian members.
In the end, the Constituent Assembly settled on what has often been described as a quasi-federal system. The Constitution recognised two tiers of government: the Union and the states. There was no mention of villages in the parts of the Constitution which dealt with Indias federal structure
However, in what appears to be a concession to the Gandhians , promotion of village panchayats was included in the Directive Principles.

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















