






























Hansa Jivraj Mehta - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Hansa Jivraj Mehta


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Hansa Jivraj Mehta
1897 - 1995




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Female
Mother Tongue: Gujarati
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Fundamental Rights+1 moreProvincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Hansa Jivraj Mehta was born on 3rd July 1897 in Surat, Gujarat. She studied philosophy at Baroda College and then journalism and sociology in England. In 1920, while in London, Mehta met Sarojini Naidu who would later introduce her to Mahatma Gandhi and the Indian women’s freedom movement.
Mehta’s political career was marked by her 1937 Bombay Legislative Council election win. Having refused to contest from a reserved seat, she took on the elections as a general category candidate. Mehta remained on the council until 1949.
During this time, Mehta became closely involved with the All India Women’s Conference and became its president in 1946. During her presidency, she drafted the Indian Women’s Charter of Rights and Duties, which demanded gender equality and civil rights for women.
At the same time, in 1946, Mehta served as a member of the United Nations sub-committee on the status of women. She was the vice-chair with Eleanor Roosevelt of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights Committee. Further, she became the first female Vice-Chancellor in India with her appointment at SNDT University in Bombay.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Mehta participated in the non-cooperation and swadeshi movements. Her involvement with India’s freedom struggle got her arrested in 1932.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Mehta was one of the 15 women framers of the Indian Constitution. She was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bombay under a Congress Party ticket. In the Assembly, she strongly argued in favour of women’s rights and intervened in debates on uniform civil code and reservation.

Mehta’s speech in the Assembly on 15th August 1947.
Later Contributions
Mehta was the Indian delegate to the United Nations Human Rights Commission. She played a significant role in ensuring that Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (‘UDHR’) was made inclusive and is credited to changing the phrase “All men are born free and equal” to “All human beings are born free and equal”. Hansa Mehta and Eleanor Roosevelt ensured marriage equality to women through Article 16 of UDHR.
Later, Mehta was appointed as the first Vice-Chancellor of the Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, with the University later naming a library in her honour.
The government awarded her with the Padma Bhushan in 1959. She passed away on 4th April 1995.


 



Key Speeches



Mehta supported the Objectives Resolution put forward by Jawaharlal Nehru, in particular its call for equality and justice for women.
She expressed her regret that the abolition of purdah could not be included in the Fundamental Rights.
The uniform civil code, she believed, was a necessity to “build up one nation”.



 



Resources



Encyclopaedia of Indian Women through the Ages (Period of Freedom Struggle).
 Women and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 ’70 years Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights‘.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















