






























Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
1888 - 1975




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Dr Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan was born on September 5th, 1888 in Tiruttani, a town in Tamil Nadu. He pursued his BA with Philosophy Honours and graduated with a Master’s degree in Philosophy from the Madras Christian College.
After graduation, in 1909, he began his prolific academic career with a temporary teaching position at the Presidency College in Madras. Further, in the year 1918, he was appointed as a Professor of Philosophy at the University of Mysore. In 1921, he was appointed as the professor of Philosophy to the King George V Chair of Mental and Moral Science at the University of Calcutta. A decade later, he attained Knighthood and subsequently, was appointed as a Spalding Professor of Eastern Religions and Ethics at Oxford University. He has the distinction of being the first Indian to hold a chair at Oxford University.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Radhakrishnan was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress Party ticket. In the Assembly, he intervened on minorities issues and objectives resolution debates.
Later Contributions:
Post-independence, Radhakrishnan led the Indian delegation to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) between 1946-1952. He was later elected to hold the post of Chairman of the UNESCO’s Executive Board for the year 1948-1949. Subsequently, he was deputed as the Indian Ambassador to the Soviet Union till 1952.
Upon his return to India, he was elected as India’s first Vice President. Subsequently, in the year 1962, he went on to become the 2nd President of India succeeding Dr Rajendra Prasad. He served his post till 1967 and retired from public life.
Radhakrishnan died on April 17, 1975.
Key Writings:
S. Radhakrishnan was a renowned scholar and published extensively on philosophy and religion. Some of his writings include Indian Philosophy, The Philosophy of the Upanishads, An Idealist view of life, Eastern Religions and Western Thought, and East and West: some reflections. His M.A thesis, titled the Ethics of Vedanta and Its Metaphysical Presuppositions, is also considered an invaluable source on the interplay between ethics and Vedanta. In the course of his writing career, he authored several commentaries on Indian works including the Bhagavad-Gita, Brahma Sutra, Upanishads and the Prasthanatraya. In his lifetime, he was also nominated 16 times for the Nobel Prize in Literature.


 



Key Speeches



When the Assembly was discussing the religious denomination issue, he argued against state-maintained institutions imparting religious instructions.
During debates around the Objectives Resolution, he spoke in length in defence of it.



 



Resources



Basic Writings of S. Radhakrishnan.
Political Thinkers of Modern India: S Radhakrishnan.
Radhakrishnan: A biography.
Organized Religion according to S. Radhakrishnan.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















