






























Tajamul Hussain - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Tajamul Hussain


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Tajamul Hussain
1893 - 1974




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi, Urdu
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Sub-Committee on Minorities 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Tajamul Hussain was born in Patna, Bihar on 19 December 1893. He completed his education from Kings’ College School, Wimbledon, and Queens College, Cambridge. He studied law at the Inner Temple, London. 
He was called to the Bar in London in 1920. However, he decided to return to Bihar, and practice at the Patna High Court. He steadily climbed up the legal profession becoming a Special Public Prosecutor in Mazaffurpur (1928) and Patna (1930) and was appointed to the Bench as a First-Class Magistrate.  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Hussain joined the Congress Party in 1921. He rose to become a prominent leader of the Shia Muslims in Bihar and served as the President for many Shia conferences for over ten years. 
He was elected to the Bihar Legislative Assembly in 1935. In the Assembly, Hussain was a foil to Mohammad Ali Jinnah earning him the wrath of hardcore Jinnah supporters. Unlike most Muslim political leaders at the time, he wanted to abolish the reservation of seats for communities in the Assembly.  
Contributions to Constitution Making
Hussain was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bihar through a Congress Party ticket. He intervened in debates around freedom of religion, proclamation of emergency and reservations.  
Post-Independence
Hussain was a member of India’s Provisional Parliament and had a 15-year stint at the Patna City Municipal Board. He didn’t hold any high positions at the Union or State governments or in the Congress Party. However, he held important positions at civil society and educational institutions that included Patna District Scouts Association, Quetta Earthquake Relief Fund, Bihar Engineering College and Bihar Veterinary College


 



Key Speeches



Hussain vehemently opposed reservations in legislatures particularly for the Muslim community arguing that such measures would do more harm than good.  
He moved an odd amendment that restricted Indians from wearing religious attire and symbols in public. 
During debates around the emergency provisions, he wanted the President to be vested with wide powers.  



 



Resources



Who’s Who, Lok Sabha Publication (1950) 
Personalities: A Comprehensive and Authentic Biographical Dictionary of Men who Matter in India [Northern India and Parliament] (Arunam and Sheel, 1950) 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















