






























National Law School of India University Wins South Zone Prelims, Reaches ConQuest 2022 Finals - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										National Law School of India University Wins South Zone Prelims, Reaches ConQuest 2022 Finals


 



Quiz
National Law School of India University Wins South Zone Prelims, Reaches ConQuest 2022 Finals
The Print team









										26 Nov																			

2022


Quiz



 Venue
St. Joseph's College of Law


Share









The CLPR team along with volunteers from St. Joseph’s College of Law
Tough competition prevailed as 42 teams battled in the preliminary regional round of the Centre for Law & Policy Research (CLPR)’s flagship quiz ‘ConQuest’ for the southern zone, held at Bengaluru’s St. Joseph’s College of Law Saturday.
ConQuest 2022, organised by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bengaluru, is supported by the South Regional office of the Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung für die Freiheit and senior Supreme Court advocate, Arvind Datar.
The prelims saw teams – comprising three members each – from universities and colleges across the South zone, including National Law School of India University, Christ (Deemed to be) University, St. Joseph’s College (Autonomous), Mount Carmel College, Jain College, Bishop Cotton Women’s Christian College, Reva University and Indian Institute of Science.
With organiser CLPR aiming to facilitate public engagement with the Indian Constitution and its values, it was notable that the quiz day coincided with ‘Constitution Day’, celebrated annually on 26 November.
Out of the 42 teams, six made it to the last leg of the competition: Two teams each from NLSIU and St. Joseph’s College of Law and one from KLE Society’s Law College and St. Joseph’s College (Autonomous).
A thrilling tie-breaker
The first round tested participants’ knowledge by throwing questions about members of the Constituent Assembly and quizzing them on marital vows.
For instance, participants were asked which Constituent Assembly and Planning Commission member was a prominent advocate for women’s emancipation and the founder of the Andhra Mahila Sabha in 1937.*
The next question was on the origins of the “Mantra Mangalya” wedding ceremony. The question was: “The couple recites the secular vows written by which Jnanpith awardee, who penned it in 1966 for his son’s wedding?”**
NLSIU Team 1 were the winners of the South Regional Round
After the first two rounds in the final leg, St. Joseph’s College (Autonomous) team had taken a commanding lead, with both NLSIU teams close behind. During the ‘List-it’ round, teams had to get as many accurate answers as possible from a grid containing nine options, within 60 seconds.
The choices included segments like “Major events of 1947,” “Constituent Assembly members from the Madras Constituency,” and “Parts of the Constitution that contain Chapters.”
The ‘Potpourri’ round saw contestants stack up a lot of quick points. Among a mixed bag of questions, some tested participants on feminist terms. For instance: “What is a phrase that refers to a qualitative analytic framework that identifies how individuals who are most marginalised in society are affected by systems of power, borrowed from the waves of feminism and coined by Kimberle Crenshaw?”***
Then there was the ‘Connect’ round where, as the name implies, teams had to determine a connecting word/phrase/event between a series of pictures.
By the end of the quiz, NLSIU’s Team 1 clinched a clear victory with 75 points. However, things got more interesting as the final stretch saw NLSIU’s Team 2 and St. Joseph’s College (Autonomous) tied after the ‘Connect’ and ‘Buzzer’ rounds.
The two teams were given a question on Constitution Day and NLSIU 2 managed to grab the second spot and booked themselves a place in the final round of ConQuest to be held at Christ College in Bengaluru on 3 December.
Answers: *Durgabai Deshmukh, **Kuvempu ***Intersectionality


This article first appeared in The Print on 29 November 2022.
ConQuest 2022 is organized by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bengaluru and is supported by the South Regional office of the Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung für die Freiheit.
ThePrint is a digital partner.








More in events





 Quiz



Gauhati Medical College Wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2022
 Christ (Deemed to be) University, Bengaluru



Event Report


03 Dec
2022







 Quiz



SRCC, NLU Delhi Win Northern Regional Round of ConQuest 2022, Qualify For Finals in Bengaluru
 National Law University Delhi



Event Report


19 Nov
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















