






























Bhawanji Arjan Khimji - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Bhawanji Arjan Khimji


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Bhawanji Arjan Khimji
1902 - 1970




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: 
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Marathi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Bhawanji Arjan Khimji was born on 20 July 1902 at Khamgaon in Maharastra’s Vidharba region. He pursued inter commerce from R. A. Podar College of Commerce & Economics, Matunga, Bombay. He was a cotton merchant and a businessman by profession.
Role in the Indian Independence Movement
Not much is known about Khimji’s involvement in the freedom struggle except that he was imprisoned for being a part of the Satyagraha and Quit India Movements. However, we know that he held important posts within the Congress Party and in local administration. Khimji was a member of the Bombay Municipal Corporation for ten years (1935-1945). Khimji was also a member of Bombay Legislative Assembly from 1937 until 1951.
As a businessman, he actively engaged with organizations in various capacities. These included the Indian Merchants Chamber, Bombay Cotton Merchants, Muccadum Association and Bombay Port Trust.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Khimji was elected to the Assembly from Bombay through a Congress Party ticket. He did not speak during the Assembly debates.
Later Contributions
Khimji was elected to the First Lok Sabha from Bombay (1952-1957). He was a member of the All-India Congress Committee for over 15 years and the President of the District Congress Committee of Kutch.
He continued to contribute to various organisations such as the East Indian Cotton Association Ltd. (1947-1950), Merchants Chamber, Bombay (1949) and the Indian Central Cotton Committee (1949-1956). He was also an office bearer for other educational trusts, medical aid trusts and relief committees.


 



Resources



Who’s who in India, Burma & Ceylon (Who’s Who Publishers (India) Limited, 1940)
Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















