






























Desk Brief: Indian Framers Refused a Constitutional Right to Bear Arms - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Indian Framers Refused a Constitutional Right to Bear Arms


 
















Desk Brief: Indian Framers Refused a Constitutional Right to Bear Arms



Blog



Editorial Team






30 May 2022

Share









 
									Image credit: Wikimedia Commons								

25 May 2022, Texas, United States: 18-year-old Salvador Ramos, armed with a semi-automatic rifle, entered an elementary school and killed 19 children.
How did teenager Ramos procure the firearm? He walked into a shop and walked out with a gun – as if buying milk.
The latest episode of the United States’ horrific mass shooting problem has predictably triggered yet another round of public outcry and political jostling around gun control. If recent history is anything to go by, a few months (or weeks) of political, media, and civil society skirmishes will follow. Advocates for stronger gun control laws will win the first couple of rounds; Those against such measures will end up ensuring that the status quo remains.
India is no stranger to violence, and we do have an illicit firearms industry, but we’ve never really had a problem with guns easily proliferating among the population and chronic mass shootings. Unlike the United States Constitution, the Constitution of India does not confer a right to bear arms. However, a proposal to include such a right was discussed in the Constituent Assembly. On 1 December 1948, H.V. Kamath, during a discussion around the rights to freedom, introduced an amendment that proposed to include a right to bear arms in Draft Article 13 (Article 19, Constitution of India 1950).
Kamath advanced three arguments in favour of the right: First, he reminded the Assembly that a key demand of the freedom movement was the constitutional right to bear arms. Second, anti-social elements would always find a way to access arms, putting those who didn’t in danger. Third, if the State allowed its citizens a right to bear arms, citizens would feel that the State trusted them.
Maulana Hasrat Mohani supported Kamath. He argued that if the Constitution deprived Indians of the right to bear arms just like the British did, there would be no difference between the colonial government and a government of independent India. He urged the Drafting Committee, particularly B.R. Ambedkar, to accept Kamath’s amendment.
At the end of the debate, Ambedkar rose to defend the Drafting Committee’s decision to refuse the right to bear arms in the Indian Constitution. He acknowledged that while the Indian freedom movement did indeed demand such a right, the British ban on Indians from bearing arms had little to do with law and order considerations. Instead, they wanted to avoid the possibility of Indians overthrowing the British.
In the context of the struggle for freedom, agitating for a right to bear arms was appropriate, Ambedkar continued. But in the present circumstance of India becoming an independent constitutional republic he could not ‘…conceive how it would be possible for the State to carry on its administration if every individual had the right to go into the market and purchase all sorts of instruments of attack without any let or hindrance from the State.’
At the end of the debate, Kamath’s proposal was put to vote, and the Assembly rejected the amendment.
In the United States, despite the frequent mass shootings, advocates for stronger gun control laws find it very hard to generate enough political support for these measures. Those who oppose strong gun laws often point to the U.S. Constitution’s provision on the right to bear arms. This right provides rhetorical ammunition to their arguments made in courts, legislatures, and the public sphere. The presence of such a right in the U.S. Constitution, whatever its original intention may have been, tilts the debate in favour of those who oppose stronger gun laws.
The fact that India does not face a problem of proliferation of guns throughout the population is plausibly because the framers decided against such a constitutional right (though there is a legal one). A culture that emphasised every Indian’s right to bear firearms was never allowed to take root.

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















