






























H. V. Kamath - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										H. V. Kamath


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
H. V. Kamath
1907 - 1982




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Central Provinces and Berar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Kannada
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Hari Vishnu Kamath was born on 13 July 1907 in Mangalore, Karnataka. Here, he completed most of his early education from Canara High School and Government College until he left to pursue further studies at Presidency College, Madras. He then he went on to obtain degrees from the London School of Economics, University College London, and the School of Oriental Studies. 
 Kamath began his career as a social worker and freelance journalist. In 1930 he qualified for the Indian Civil Service and served under the British Government in various capacities that included: Assistant Commissioner (1931-1932), Additional District Judge (1934-35), Under Secretary (1936) and Additional District Magistrate (1937-38).  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
In 1938 Kamath changed sides – he left his ICS career behind to participate in the freedom movement. He joined Subhash Chandra Bose’s Forward Bloc — a leftist-nationalist political party that emerged from a faction in the Indian National Congress — as its General Secretary. This was followed by a series of imprisonments between 1940 and 1945 for his participation in the freedom struggle. In one such instance in which Kamath was arrested for protesting India’s participation in the Second World War, the Magistrate hearing the case bemoaned that a former civil servant would choose to follow this path.  
Contribution to Constitution Making
Kamath was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Central Provinces and Berar on a Congress Party ticket. In the Assembly, he was something of an enfant terrible making frequent, lengthy and exasperating interventions. On one occasion, much to the Assembly’s bewilderment, he earnestly proposed the addition of ‘interplanetary travel’ to the Union List.  
Later Contributions
After 1950, Kamath fell out of favour with Congress and joined the Praja Socialist Party under whose banner he contested India’s first general election.  He lost by a narrow margin of 174 votes. Predictably, and true to his character, Kamath went to the Supreme Court challenging the election results on the grounds of electoral malpractice. He successfully secured a fresh election which he won and made his way into India’s first Lok Sabha. He would go on to serve for two more terms (1955-57, 1962-67).  
In Parliament, as he did in the Constituent Assembly, Kamath made sure he was noticed. Some of his absurd and attention-grabbing proposals included an amendment to the Constitution that banned further amendments, a bill to remove benefits to ministers including free electricity, water and furniture, and reservations in the Parliament for people from Pakistan-Occupied-Kashmir in 1966. 
None of these, however, stopped Kamath from getting opportunities to represent India at international forums that included the World Government Conference in London (1952), the Conference of Socialist International in Israel (1960), and the United Nations General Assembly Session (1977).  
Kamath passed away in 1982. 
Key Writings 
H.V. Kamath’s writings include  Communist China Colonizes Tibet, Invades India, Principles and Techniques of Administration (1971), and Last Days of Jawaharlal Nehru (1977).


 



Key Speeches



To the dismay of many Assembly members, Kamath proposed that the Preamble begin with ‘In the name of God’ and moved an amendment to this effect.
When the Assembly was discussing emergency provisions, Kamath moved a set of amendments which strove to protect fundamental rights and individual liberties during an emergency.
During a debate around Article 1, Kamath said that India should be defined as a ‘Union of Pradeshas’ and not ‘Union of States’
While discussing the ordinance making power of the President, Kamath argued that such ordinances need to be placed before the Parliament within a specified period of its promulgation to prevent the President from misusing his/her power.



 



Resources



H.V. Kamath’s speech in the Constituent Assembly (Prasar Bharti Archives, 1946)  
HV Kamath: The contrarian who became legendary for his antics and interjections by Vikram Doctor (Economic Times, 2020)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















