






























Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt
1898 - 1986




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay States
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt was born on 19 February 1898 in Sirohi, Rajasthan. He was actively involved in India’s independence movement and a social worker for over 50 years. Known as the ‘Gandhi’ of Rajasthan, he was involved in issues like prohibition, empowerment of women and depressed classes and promoting village industries.
He started his education in Bombay after his family moved there from Rajasthan.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Bhatt was inspired by Mahatma Gandhi and his values throughout his adolescence. In 1920, he left his undergraduate studies at St. Xavier’s College, Bombay and joined the Non-Cooperation Movement started by the Indian National Congress under Gandhi’s leadership in 1921. Later on, he was also a part of the Salt Satyagraha (1930) and the Quit India Movement (1942).
In 1939, he moved back to Sirohi, then a princely state in Rajasthan. He started the Sirohi Praja Mandal in the same year, along with seven others. The Praja Mandal was considered a separate unit of the Congress party that would organise the people from the Princely States in the demand for Purna Swaraj.
During this time, Bhatt was a member of the Congress Working Committee and President of the Rajasthan Pradesh Congress Committee.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Bhatt was elected to the Constitutent Assembly from Bombay States through a Congress party ticket.
He wasn’t a part of any Committees in the Assembly, but he was a fierce advocate for local democracy and decentralisation. He made several interventions on the integration of princely states, the debate on Sirohi’s inclusion in Rajasthan, village panchayats and the debate on Union powers.
His tenure as the Rajasthan Pradesh Congress Committee President was referenced during Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel’s explanation about including Mount Abu in Rajasthan.
Later Contributions:
Bhatt was a member of the All-India Khadi and Village Industries Board (1956-57) and was Chairman of its Rajasthan branch from 1977. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan in 1971 for his services in social work in the state of Rajasthan. However, he was arrested along with others because of protests against the Emergency in 1975.
He died on 6 October 1986.


 



Key Speeches



Bhatt raised a point about whether Sirohi should be included in Rajasthan or Bombay during the debate on the First Schedule.
In his speech commenting on the Draft Constitution, he lamented about the lack of Gandhian values in the text.



 



Resources



Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt – Jamnalal Bajaj Foundation (1982)
The People Versus Emergency: A Saga of Struggle by Pra. Ga Sahasrabuddhe, Māṇikacandra Vājapeyī (1991)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















