






























S. Nagappa - Constitution of India

























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										S. Nagappa


 



Constituent Assembly Members
S. Nagappa
1911 - 




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life:
Sardar Nagappa was born on 6 October 1911 in Kurnool District in the erstwhile Madras province. He passed his matriculation examination in 1932 from the local municipal school, after which he earned his livelihood by stitching khadi.
Nagappa joined the Congress in 1930. In the 1937 Madras Presidency Elections, he ran and won for a general seat in Kurnool. He worked to uplift and empower members of the Scheduled Castes, and started a free hostel for students from these communities in Kurnool in 1938.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Nagappa was the first in Kurnool district to offer individual satyagraha in support of the ongoing Satyagraha, or Civil Disobedience Movement; he was eventually jailed for his participation in the Movement.
As a member of the Kurnool District Congress Committee, he was behind the famous Kurnool District Circular which provided detailed guidelines for local organizations to support the Quit India Movement. His involvement in this Movement also resulted in his imprisonment for a period of 18 months.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Nagappa was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras province under the Congress Party ticket. He intervened in some important debates on the representation of minorities and reservation.
Later Contributions:
After his stint in the Constituent Assembly, he ran for elections twice: in the first general elections in 1952, as a candidate from the Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party (KMPP), and as a member of the Congress Party in the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly elections in 1967. However, he was defeated both times.


 



Key Speeches



Nagappa moved an amendment, which was supported by Ambedkar, to ensure that members contesting reserved seats would only be able to take office after securing at least 35% of the votes polled by the Scheduled Caste communities.
He supported the idea of having a strong centre and defended reservation of minorities for a certain period of time.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















