






























Diwan Chaman Lall - Constitution of India
























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Diwan Chaman Lall


 



Constituent Assembly Members
Diwan Chaman Lall
1892 - 1973




Key Information

Party: All-India Trade Union Congress
Constituency: Patiala and East Punjab States Union
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Provincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
A staunch advocate of labour rights, Diwan Chaman Lall was born on 30 October 1892. He did his schooling in Rawalpindi. He then pursued a degree in jurisprudence at Jesus College, Oxford and eventually completed his law degree at Middle Temple, London. 
After graduating, Lall worked as a journalist for a quarterly magazine called ‘Coterie’ and later as the Editor of the newspaper, ‘The Bombay Chronicle’.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Lall was not directly involved in India’s freedom struggle. However, he was one of the most influential leaders in organising workers’ rights movements and voicing the concerns of the labour class in India.
In 1920, Lall founded the All-Indian Trade Union Congress. He contributed significantly to the development of the Trade Union movement in India. He was the President of many trade unions including the All India Telegraph Workmen’s Union, All India Press Workers’ Union, the All India Postal, and various Railway unions. 
In 1929-30 Lall played a crucial role in giving recommendations to the Whitley Commission – he recommended raising the minimum age of employment to 13. He then led India’s delegation at the International Labour Conference (Montreal) in 1946. 
Lall participated in electoral politics as well. He was a member of the Central Legislative Assembly twice (1924 to 1931 and 1944 to 1946). Lall was also a member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly (1937 to 1945).
Contribution to Constitution Making
In 1946, Lall was elected to the Constituent Assembly from East Punjab representing the All-India Trade Union Congress party. However, he resigned after two years. He spoke on the voting rights of people who migrated to India after the partition.  
Later Contributions
Lall continued to be active in politics post-independence. He served as the Indian Ambassador to Turkey (1949 to 1950). Lall was a member of the Rajya Sabha for three terms (1952 to 1956, 1956 to 1962, and 1962 to 1968).  
During his term as a Rajya Sabha member, Lall introduced a private member bill to amend provisions on obscenity in the Indian Penal Code (1963). In the bill, he proposed to exempt works of art, or publications meant for research, science, or literature from the applicability of obscenity provisions. The amendment was passed in 1969.
An eminent leader of the Trade Union movement in India, Lall passed away on 12 November 1973 and is still remembered for his contribution to the labour movement. 
Key Writings
An avid writer, Lall has written many books. One of his most popular books is ‘Coolie: The Story of Labour and Capital in India’ published in 1932 which highlighted the plight of the working class population in India.


 



Key Speeches



Lall highlighted that after the Radcliffe Award, the communal demographics of India had altered. Therefore, he suggested a proportional increase in the number of members representing the Hindu and Sikh communities in the Constituent Assembly



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















