






























Symbiosis Law School, AFMC Qualify for ConQuest 2022 All-India Finals on 3 December - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Symbiosis Law School, AFMC Qualify for ConQuest 2022 All-India Finals on 3 December


 



Quiz
Symbiosis Law School, AFMC Qualify for ConQuest 2022 All-India Finals on 3 December
The Print team









										05 Nov																			

2022


Quiz



 Venue
Shankarrao Chavan Law College, Pune


Share









The Centre for Law & Policy Research (CLPR) is back with the latest edition of its annual flagship quiz ConQuest — India’s premier national quiz on the Constitution, history and politics.
Symbiosis Law School, Pune trounced stiff competition from five other institutes on 5 November to emerge winner in the regional round (West) of the popular national quiz.
Winners of the West Regional Round from Symbiosis Law School, Pune
ConQuest is part of CLPR’s larger constitutional culture initiative, which aims to facilitate public engagement with the Constitution and its values. The quiz is an extension of ConstitutionofIndia.net, a digital open-access resource on India’s constitutional and political history, which includes a digitised, tagged and easily searchable version of the Constituent Assembly Debates.
While Symbiosis got 115 points, Armed Forces Medical College, Pune finished second with 80. Six teams from the initial 30 qualified for the West Regional Finals held at Kale Hall, Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics in Pune.
These included Symbiosis Law School Pune, Armed Forces Medical College Pune, V.M. Salgaocar College of Law Goa, Government Law College Mumbai and 2 teams from Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics.
The final is in Bengaluru on 3 December.
The theme for this year’s ConQuest is celebrating 75 years of Indian Independence, and most questions found a contemporary relevance for events that shaped India’s Independence movement.
Digging up trivia — from Princestan to Manto
The preliminary round set the tone for successive rounds of brain teasers that tested the participants’ knowledge. For instance, what is the name of a 2022 book that also shares its name with an unsuccessful plan of creating a country with 565 states, spearheaded by Mohammad Hamidullah Khan?*
Or a more direct question that featured in this round was: What is the seal of the Constituent Assembly of India?**
Things took an intense turn as the ‘List It’ round shook up the scoreboard. Languages that appear on the Indian currency notes were quite the battle with one team failing to score at all, garnering much sympathy from the audience.
The ‘PotPourri’ round – a mixed bag of questions that allowed the finalists to get a solid chunk of points early in the final – promised interesting connections and trivia bits on the main theme.
Book cover of Naya Qanoon by Saadat Hasan Manto
For instance, ‘Naya Qanoon’ – Saadat Hasan Manto’s 1930s short story – uses the spat between a tonga driver and an Englishman who refused to pay a steeper fare to reveal an Indian Independence easter egg. Ustaad Mangu, the tonga driver was prompted to attack the Englishman after becoming aware of the buzz on the street – the passage of a then recent piece of legislation that was meant to grant a large measure of autonomy to the provinces of British India. The piece of legislation that ended the system of diarchy introduced by its predecessor that’s at the heart of this short story is The Government of India Act, 1935.
The last round of the West Regional finals was the ‘Buzzer’ round which saw Symbiosis cruise to the top. V.M. Salgaocar College of Law also got most of the answers right, but stumbled on identifying the Independence activist, Kanaklata Barua, who featured on the cover of Amar Chitra Katha’s series ‘Valiant Women of India’. Salgaocar College came third place with 70 points.
The CLPR team with faculty and volunteers from Shankarrao Chavan Law College
ConQuest 2022 now moves to Kolkata for the East Regional Round which will be held on 12 November. The North finals are in Delhi on 19 November, followed by the South zone on 26 November in Bengaluru.
Since its first edition in 2016, ConQuest has become the largest quiz and educational activity that celebrates India’s constitutional history and politics. The 2022 edition returns in-person after a 3-year hiatus due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Answers: *”Princestan” by Sandeep Bamzai; **elephant.


This article first appeared in ThePrint on 8 November 2022.
ConQuest 2022 is organized by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bengaluru and is supported by the South Regional office of the Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung für die Freiheit.
ThePrint is a digital partner.



Suggested Reading


ConQuest: India’s Premier National Quiz on the Indian Constitution, History and Politics



Our Independence Movement Constitution



Our Independence Movement Constitution






More in events





 Quiz



Gauhati Medical College, WBNUJS Qualify for ConQuest 2022 National Finals
 Loreto College, Kolkata



Event Report


12 Nov
2022







 Quiz



SRCC, NLU Delhi Win Northern Regional Round of ConQuest 2022, Qualify For Finals in Bengaluru
 National Law University Delhi



Event Report


19 Nov
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















