






























Article 85: Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
85



Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution

(1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People.



 
 

Version 1




Article 69, Draft Constitution 1948
(1) The Houses of Parliament shall be summoned to meet twice at least in every year, and six months shall not intervene between their last sitting in one session and the date appointed for their first sitting in the next session.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this article, the President may from time to time-
(a) Summon the Houses or either House of Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit;
(b) Prorogue the Houses;
(c) Dissolve the House of the People.




Version 2


Article 85, Constitution of India 1950
(1) The Houses of Parliament shall be summoned to meet twice at least in every year, and six months shall not intervene between their last sitting in one session and the date appointed for their first sitting in the next session.
(2) Subject to the provisions of clause (1), the President may from time to time—
(a) summon the Houses or either House to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit;
(b) prorogue the Houses;
(c) dissolve the House of the People.




Summary


Draft Article 69 (Article 85) was debated on 18 May 1949. It regulated the sessions of the Parliaments, its prorogation and dissolution.
A member proposed an amendment to replace ‘six months’ to ‘three months’ in clause 1. This would ensure that the Parliament met more often and spend more time on its business. He further sought to add a proviso to clause 1 to treat the Parliament’s annual session as ‘as a continuous single annual session’.
Another member moved an amendment to replace ‘twice’ to ‘thrice’ in clause 1. He accused the Drafting Committee of mindlessly copying this provision from the Government of India Act, 1935, without taking into account the nature of new, independent India’s polity. In support of this amendment, a member highlighted how during the budget session of the Parliament, other legislative matters were sidestepped. Having compulsory three sessions would allow the Parliament to attend to more legislative work. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee noted that the Draft Article did not prohibit the Parliament from meeting frequently. This provision merely ensured minimum parliamentary sittings. He believed that the Parliament would meet so often that the members would ‘probably themselves get tired of the sessions’. Moreover, the Parliament was not only responsible for ensuring ‘good administration’ but also to be responsible to the people and give effect to the majority government’s party mandate.
There was a proposal to allow either the Speaker of the House of the People or the Chairman of the Council of States to summon his/her respective houses in case the President failed to do so in three months. Coming from a place of suspicion in the President’s role, he argued that the Constitution must be prepared for all future contingencies. This amendment would ensure that the business of the Parliament could be carried as usual. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee did not believe that a President would disobey a constitutionally laid down obligation. Indeed, if he/she refused to convene the meeting then this would be a sufficient ground to impeach him/her.
The Assembly did not accept these proposals. It adopted the Draft Article on 18 May 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















