






























This Month in Constitution Making (June 1934): Congress Makes The First Official Demand For A Constituent Assembly - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										This Month in Constitution Making (June 1934): Congress Makes The First Official Demand For A Constituent Assembly


 
















This Month in Constitution Making (June 1934): Congress Makes The First Official Demand For A Constituent Assembly



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






13 June 2023

Share









 
									Delegates at the Second Round Table Conference, 1931								

In a historic moment in June 1934, the Indian National Congress, for the first time, officially demanded an Indian Constituent Assembly1 to frame India’s Constitution. This added a new strand to Congress’s political engagement with the British on the future of India. Going forward, the demand for a Constituent Assembly would be made alongside calls for ‘Purna Swaraj’ or complete independence.
The Congress’s demand was triggered by the 1933 British White Paper2 that emerged from the Round Table Conferences. These conferences were organized with the aim of resolving India’s constitutional and communal issues. However, when the conferences failed to produce satisfactory results, the British government drafted a ‘White Paper’ outlining a range of constitutional reforms for India.
The White Paper faced significant criticism and opposition from Indian political parties, including the Congress. They argued that the proposed reforms did not adequately address India’s aspirations for self-governance and were insufficient in granting Indians the right to determine their own constitutional future.
On 16-17 June 1934, the Congress Working Committee passed a resolution which stated that the White Paper ‘in no way expresses the will of the people of India…the only satisfactory alternative…is constitution drawn up by a Constituent Assembly elected on the basis of adult suffrage or as near it as possible, with the power, if necessary, to the important minorities to have their representative elected exclusively by the electors belonging to such minorities’
This was first time that the Congress officially demanded a Constituent Assembly for India. The British ignored the demand and embarked on a process to implement the White Paper. With every move that the British made, the Congress reiterated, with even greater force and conviction, its demand for a Constituent Assembly.
The British government’s next step was to refer the White Paper to a Joint Committee set up by the two houses of British parliament. The Committee was tasked to prepare a report. When this Report came out, the Congress termed it as a document that aimed to ‘facilitate and perpetuate the domination and exploitation of this country’.
The report formed the basis on the Government of India Act that British Parliament passed in 1935. The Government of India Act 1935 was in effect going to be the Constitution of India. The Congress rejected the Act and in a 1936 resolution declared that ‘no constitution imposed by outside authority and no constitution which curtails the sovereignty of the people of India and does not recognise their right to shape and control fully their political and economic future can be accepted. ‘
The resolution went on to say that the only Constitution that was acceptable was one that was based ‘on the independence of India as a nation and it can only be framed by a Constituent Assembly elected on adult franchise or a franchise which approximates to it as nearly as possible.’ The Resolution once again demanded ‘in the name of the people’ for a Constituent Assembly.
Congress session at Faizpur 1936
In the same year, Jawaharlal Nehru, in his presidential address at the Faizapur Congress, told the gathering that the demand for a Constituent Assembly was now the ‘cornerstone of Congress policy today’. And indeed, it was. Resolution after resolution, speech after speech, the Congress kept re-iterating its call for a Constituent Assembly.
Towards the end of the 1930s, the Congress had more or less managed to saturate Indian political discourse with the demand for a Constituent Assembly. Around the same time, the Second World war was on the horizon, and the British saw the cooperation of Indians as critical in the war effort. The British could not ignore Indian political demands anymore. In August 1940, through a statement made by Viceroy Linlithgow – ‘August Offer 1940’ – it recognised the right of Indians to frame their own Constitution. While this was a victory of a sort, the ‘communal problem’ now took centre stage: the Muslim League had passed the Pakistan Resolution earlier in the year triggering a widespread uncertainty and conflict among India’s political parties. The formation of an Indian Constituent Assembly was still a distant possibility.
The Framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents, Vol. 1, Ed. by B. Shiva Rao, (New Delhi: Universal Law Publiching Co.), 1966. [↩]“The Idea of an Indian Constituent Assembly”, in The Indian Journal of Political Science, Vol. 2, No. 3, by Gurmukh Nihal Singh, 1941. [↩]

Tags Indian Constituent AssemblyIndian National CongressRound Table Conference 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Our Independence Movement Constitution

09 August 2024
												• By Editorial Team

What made the Indian Independence Movement so unique? How did the experiences of the Independence movement leaders shape the framing of our Constitution?


 3 mins										




 

Bhagat Singh Hanged, Karachi Resolution Passed

23 March 2023
												• By Vineeth Krishna

On 23 March 1931 the British hanged Bhagat Singh for his involvement in the Lahore Conspiracy Case. Just a week later, the the Indian National Congress  passed the iconic Karachi Resolution 1931. Were these two historic events connected?


 3 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















