






























Tightening the Noose on Interfaith Marriage - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Tightening the Noose on Interfaith Marriage


 
















Tightening the Noose on Interfaith Marriage



Blog



Varsha Nair






31 January 2022

Share









 
									B.R. Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly. 
Image Credits: Wikimedia Commons								

Interfaith couples in India can get married under the Special Marriage Act 1954. This is often accompanied by the threat of harassment and violence from family members as the Act requires couples to declare an intention to marry to State authorities and provides a 30-day window for anyone to file objections. To avoid this, many interfaith couples avoid the SMA route and adopt another strategy: one of the parties to convert to the religion of the other and get their marriage registered under the relevant personal law – a process that allows for relatively more secrecy. Recent anti-conversion legislation like the Karnataka Protection of Right to Freedom of Religion Bill do not bode well for this strategy.
The Karnataka anti-conversion bill fuses religious conversions and interfaith marriage. It prohibits marriages done with the sole purpose of conversion as well as conversions carried out with the exclusive intention of marriage. Such marriages can be declared void irrespective of whether the conversions take place before or after marriage. The law, once it comes into action, would place inter-faith marriages under further scrutiny in an atmosphere of ever-expanding animosity towards such relationships which during the framing of India’s constitution were seen as critical.
In March 1947, the Constituent Assembly’s Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights in a vote of 5-4 rejected Minoo Masani’s proposal to add the clause, ‘No impediments to marriages between citizens shall be based merely upon difference of religion‘ as a fundamental right to the Constitution.
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Hansa Mehta and B.R. Ambedkar supported Masani’s amendment. Kaur and Mehta, disappointed with the Committee’s decision, filed a dissent arguing India’s claim to nationhood was compromised if the Constitution did not explicitly signal that inter-faith marriages, deserved protection. B.R. Ambedkar in Annihilation of Caste had identified marriage between people of different social groups critical to breakdown social hierarchies.
“…The real remedy [against untouchability] is inter-marriage. Fusion of blood can alone create the feeling of being kith and kin, and unless this feeling of kinship, of being kindred, becomes paramount, the separatist feeling—the feeling of being aliens—created by Caste will not vanish…Where society is already well-knit by other ties, marriage is an ordinary incident of life. But where society is cut asunder, marriage as a binding force becomes a matter of urgent necessity.”
The recent trend of state legislations combining anti-conversion with interfaith marriage now compounds the challenges faced by interfaith couples who want to get married. Kaur, Mehta and Ambedkar would be deeply concerned with these developments.

Tags Interfaith Marriage 








Suggested Reading


Minoo Masani’s Speech on 17 December 1946



1947 | Hansa Jivraj Mehta’s Speech Presenting India’s National Flag










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















