






























Y. S. Parmar - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Y. S. Parmar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Y. S. Parmar
1906 - 




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Himachal Pradesh-Bilaspur
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Doctorate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography


 





Biography


Early Life
YS Parmar was born on 4 August 1906 in Siramur, Himachal Pradesh. He studied at the Nahan High School, a prestigious institution in the area and was an undergraduate at Lahore’s Christian College for Men. He earned a doctorate from Lucknow University and later worked as a Magistrate.
Role in Independence Movement
Not much is known about Parmar’s role in the independence movement.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Parmar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Himachal Pradesh through a Congress Party ticket. He did not actively engage in the Assembly debates.
Later Contributions
Parmar was elected as the Chief Minister of the Himachal Pradesh government (1952-1956). He stepped down from the post as Chief Minister when the State was converted to a Union Territory only to be re-elected as the Chief Minister when Himachal Pradesh was reinstated as a State.
He set up the Himalayan Forest Farming and Environmental Conservation Society and introduced a 3D forest policy to meet the needs of timber, fuel and wood in the State.
His work around education led to the opening of a number of educational institutes in Himachal Pradesh.
Parmar is known as the ‘Legend of Himachal Pradesh’ and is fondly remembered for helping Himachal achieve complete statehood in 1971.
Key Writings
Parmar wrote about Himachal Pradesh, its traditions, the need for statehood and his achievements in the books that included Himachal Pradesh: Area and Language, Years of Challenge and Growth, Pradesh: Case for Statehood and Polyandry in the Himalayas


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















