






























Desk Brief: Sardar Patel's Spirited Defence of the Indian Civil Services - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Sardar Patel’s Spirited Defence of the Indian Civil Services


 
















Desk Brief: Sardar Patel’s Spirited Defence of the Indian Civil Services



Blog



Editorial Team






23 April 2022

Share









 
									Image Credits: Samruddha Bharat Foundation								

In light of Civil Services Day which was celebrated on 21 April, we give you a peek into a fascinating moment in the Constituent Assembly that was perhaps instrumental in giving the civil services a constitutional status and a key role in India’s governance.
On 10th October 1949, the Assembly had taken up a new amendment (Draft Article 283-A) to the Draft Constitution related to the service conditions of the Indian Civil Service (ICS) officers. During the course of the debate, some Assembly members launched salvos on the ICS officers who, along with their British ICS colleagues, were critical in maintaining British colonial rule in India. Now that India was an independent country, our Constitution framers had to decide the future of these ICS officers.
Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, a lawyer, felt that the members of the ICS had not ‘…changed their manners. They have not reconciled themselves to the new situation. They do not feel that they are part and parcel of this country…’. Veteran freedom fighter and social worker Babu Ramnarayan Singh said the ICS officers ‘…thought that they were masters of the country, they would remain masters and that they would continue to rule the people. This mentality is still lingering in them…’. The Assembly will ‘have to consider as to what extent these people can serve and protect the people properly’.
Sardar Patel, a highly influential Assembly member, responded to these statements in what was perhaps his fiercest moment in the Assembly. He said:
‘…I myself was arrested, I have been arrested several times [by ICS officers]. But that has never made any difference in my feeling towards people in the services…But what is the language that you are using? I wish to place it on record in this House that if, during the last two or three years, most of the members of the services had not behaved patriotically and with loyalty, the Union would have collapsed…’
A livid Patel suggested to his fellow Assembly members that the ICS officers were a key instrument for governance and that it was best that the Indian political class learn to not ‘quarrel with the instruments with which you want to work’. He then offered what was nearly an ultimatum to the Assembly: ‘…So, once and for all decide whether you want this service or not. If you have done with it and decide not to have this service at all, even in spite of my pledged word, I will take the Services with me and go…’
Patel’s powerful defence of the ICS shut down critics and skeptics of India’s civil service in the Assembly. The Assembly, in what was rather unique for the time, added exclusive provisions on the civil services into the Constitution. Further, Patel’s spirited speech along with his trust in the civil services in the early years of the republic, explains how Sardar Patel came to be considered something of a godfather in the Indian civil service fraternity.

Tags Indian Constituent AssemblyIndian Civil Services 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















