






























P. Subbarayan - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										P. Subbarayan


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
P. Subbarayan
1889 - 1962




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Provincial Constitution CommitteeSub-Committee I (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee)+1 moreSub-Committee II (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee) 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Paramasivan Subbarayan was born on 11 September 1889 in Tamil Nadu. He graduated from Presidency College Madras and then pursued his M.A. at the University of Oxford. Subsequently, he obtained an LLB from the University of London and an LLD from Trinity College, Dublin. He worked as an advocate in the Madras High Court.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Subbarayan started his political career as a Member of the Justice Party. Subsequently, he quit the Justice Party and was supported as an independent candidate by the Swarajya Party. He later joined the Indian National Congress in 1933. He was a member of the Madras Parliament (1921-1949). He was elected as the Chief Minister of Madras (1926-1930).
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Subbarayan was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras on a Congress party ticket. He made important contributions to the debates on adult franchise, civil services, rule of law and the offical language.
Later Contributions:
Subbarayan was a member of the Rajya Sabha (1954-57). He was appointed as the Governor of Maharashtra in 1962.
He submitted a dissent note to the First Official Language Commission constituted in 1955 titled “Minute of ‘Dissent” advocating for English as the official language. He proposed English as it was considered a convenient medium in non-Hindi speakings States and was a window to knowledge. He believed English would help provide access to a global knowledge pool.
He actively worked on Dalit rights issues. He was on the Provincial Executive Committee of the Tamil Nadu Harijan Sevak Sangh. During his tenure as Chief Minister of the Madras Presidency, a number of legislations were introduced to abolish untouchability and promote education.
Subbarayan passed away on 6 October 1962.
In 1989, India Post issued a stamp to honour him.


 



Key Speeches



Subbarayan was a strong proponent of adult franchise. He believed that illiteracy should not be a ground for disqualifying voters in India.
He defended the civil service and emphasised its importance in governance.



 



Resources



Contribution of Dr.P. Subbarayan for the Elevation of Dalits – A Historical Study



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















