






























N.V. Gadgil - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										N.V. Gadgil


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
N.V. Gadgil
1896 - 1966




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Marathi
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life:
N.V. Gadgil was born on 10 January 1896 in Maharashtra. He graduated from Fergusson College, Pune (1918) after which he also obtained a degree in law (1920).
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
After receiving his law degree, Gadgil joined the Indian National Congress and actively participated in India’s freedom movement. He was imprisoned eight times for his involvement in various freedom struggle activities. Gadgil rose to prominence as a significant national leader through his contributions to the independence struggle.
He was a pioneer of various social reform movements in Maharashtra in the 1930s and had a thriving political career too. Gadgil served as the Secretary of the Poona District Congress Committee (1921 to 1925), the President of the Maharashtra Pradesh Congress Committee (1937 to 1945), and the Secretary of the Congress Legislative Party (1945 to 1947). In 1934, he was elected to the Legislative Assembly of the Central Provinces.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Gadgil was elected as a member of the Constituent Assembly from Bombay through a Congress party ticket. He actively participated in various Assembly debates including ones around the national language of India, the federal set up of the nation and the discussion on the budget estimates of the Assembly.
Later Contributions:
Gadgil served as a minister of Public Works, Mines and Power (1947 and 1952) and as a member of the Congress Working Committee (1952 to 1955). He was also the Governor of Punjab (1958 to 1962).
Gadgil significantly contributed to Marathi Literature and for this he was elected as the President of the Marathi Sahitya Sammelan (1962). He was the vice-chancellor of Poona University from 1964.
The Indian Posts & Telegraphs Department issued a commemorative stamp in his honour of being a veteran freedom fighter and national leader.
He passed away on 12 January 1966.
Key Writings:
Gadgil published a number of books and essays in the fields of politics, economics, law, and history. He wrote a large number of his works in Marathi. A few of Gadgil’s writings include: Pathik (Autobiography), Rajya Shastra Wichar, Shubha Shastra, Waktrutwa Shastra, Gyanbache Arthashastra, Government from Inside and Shikhancha Itihaas (History of Sikhs).


 



Key Speeches



Gadgil argued that Hindi should be made the national language and Devnagiri the script. He believed that having a single language for the entire Union would be an achievement the Assembly should work towards. He believed that the non-Hindi speakers could eventually learn the language and would choose Hindi as the national language over English, if given the option.
When a Bill is sent to the Governor of a State for his/her assent, Gadgil felt that the Bill should be sent back within a limited period- with or without amendments, failing which it would be assumed that the Governor consented to it.
He believed that it would be impossible to govern a country as large as India through a unitary set up. He strongly advocated for a federal form of government for the better administration of an extremely diverse nation.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















