






























Part XXI Archives - Constitution of India






















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII







 
Part XXI
Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions
Part XXI of the Constitution contains Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions related to various states.
Read More 


 





Articles 369 to 392








Article 369: Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the Concurrent List


Article 370: Temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir


Article 371: Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat


Article 371A: Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland


Article 371B: Special provision with respect to the State of Assam


Article 371C: Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur


Article 371D: Special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana


Article 371E: Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh


Article 371F: Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim


Article 371G: Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram


Article 371H: Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal Pradesh


Article 371-I: Special provision with respect to the State of Goa


Article 371J: Special provisions with respect to the State of Karnataka


Article 372: Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation


Article 372A: Power of the President to adapt laws.


Article 373: Power of President to make order in respect of persons under preventive detention in certain cases


Article 374:  Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings pending in the Federal Court or before His Majesty in Council


Article 375: Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject to the provisions of the Constitution


Article 376: Provisions as to Judges of High Courts


Article 377: Provisions as to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India


Article 378: Provisions as to Public Service Commissions


Article 378A: Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly


Article 379: Provisions as to provisional Parliament and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof (Omitted)


Article 380: Provision as to President (Omitted)


Article 381: Council of Ministers of the President (Omitted)


Article 382: Provisions as to provisional Legislatures for States in Part A of the First Schedule (Omitted)


Article 383: Provision as to Governors of Provinces (Omitted)


Article 384: Council of Ministers of the Governors (Omitted)


Article 385: Provision as to provisional Legislatures in States in Part B of the First Schedule (Omitted)


Article 386: Council of Ministers for States in Part B of the First Schedule (Omitted)


Article 387: Special provision as to determination of population for the purposes of certain elections (Omitted)


Article 388: Provisions as to the filling of casual vacancies in the provisional Parliament and provisional Legislatures of the States (Omitted)


Article 389: Provision as to Bills pending in the Dominion Legislatures and in the Legislatures of Provinces and Indian States (Omitted)


Article 390: Money received or raised or expenditure incurred between the commencement of the Constitution and the 31st day of March, 1950 (Omitted)


Article 391: Power of the President to amend the First and Fourth Schedules in certain contingencies (Omitted)


Article 392: Power of the President to remove difficulties





 
 



 
More About Part XXI: Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions

Part XXI of the Constitution contains Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions related to various states.




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















