






























Article 67: Term of office of Vice-President - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
67



Term of office of Vice-President

The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that—
(a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;
(c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.



 
 

Version 1




Article 56, Draft Constitution of India 1948
The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that-
(a) A Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) A Vice-President may be removed from his office for incapacity or want of confidence by a resolution of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;
(c) A Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.




Version 2


Article 67, Constitution of India 1950
The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that—
(a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;
(c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.




Summary


Draft Article 56 was discussed on 29th December 1948. It laid down the term of the Vice-President’s office.
There was a proposal to specify the emoluments including a salary of INR 4500 per month, residential and post-retirement benefits. The mover argued that if the President’s residential benefits were laid down in the Constitution, similar provisions must be made for the Vice-President. Further, the post-retirement benefits would ensure that candidates from economically underprivileged backgrounds were provided with equal opportunity to compete in the Vice-Presidential elections.
A member wanted to include grounds of disqualifications including violation of the Constitution, a conviction of a crime, mental incapacity and corruption. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee responded by highlighting that ‘want of confidence’ in clause b covers the grounds mentioned in the member’s amendment- there was no need to specifically mention it in the Constitution.
Another member sought clarity with respect to removal of the Vice-President. The Draft Article did not specify the required majority to remove the Vice-President. Further, the member was puzzled with the removal process of the Vice-President being more stringent than that of the President. Vice-President’s removal required the Resolution to be passed by both houses of the Parliament but that of President’s required only one. A member moved an amendment which would require 2/3rd majority from both the houses of the Parliament to remove the Vice-President. He stressed that since the Vice-President’s role is important, his removal must not be a casual affair. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee pointed out that the Vice-President’s primary role is that as the Chairman of the Council of States. Hence his removal process is similar to that of the Speaker of House of People – there was no need for a 2/3rd majority.
The Assembly adopted the Draft Article without any amendments.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















