






























Article 155: Appointment of Governor - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part VI

Article
155



Appointment of Governor

The Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.



 
 

Version 1




Article 131, Draft Constitution of India 1948
The Governor of a State shall be elected by direct vote of all persons who have the right to vote at a general election for the Legislative Assembly of the State.
Alternatively
The Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal from a panel of four candidates to be elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State, or, where there is a Legislative Council in the State, by all the members of the Legislative Assembly and of the Legislative Council of the State assembled at a joint meeting, in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.




Version 2


Article 155, Constitution of India 1950
The Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.




Summary


Draft Article 131 (Article 155) was debated on 30th May and 31st May 1949. This Draft Article had two versions, one which laid out the procedure for election of the Governor, and the other which laid out the procedure for appointment. The debates focused on whether the Governor should be chosen through election or by appointment.
Some members who were in favour of election pointed out that the Assembly had taken a resolution two years ago stating that the Governor would be chosen through election. One member argued that an appointed Governor could be from any state, and therefore would be an inefficient administrator since he would not have any knowledge of the people or language.
Many members favoured the system of appointment, but disapproved of the process laid out in the Draft Article. One member argued that provincial autonomy and successful state cabinet governments could only be ensured by the ‘existence of a fairly impartial constitutional head’. He also opposed the system of appointment from a panel of candidates in the Draft Article as not ‘conducive to amicable relations’ since it would encourage factionalism within the party. A member of the Drafting Committee also agreed with this proposition, stating that appointment was more suitable given that the function of the Governor was ‘to be a constitutional head, a sagacious counselor and adviser to the Ministry one who can throw oil over troubled waters’. The Prime Minister agreed with these arguments, stating that appointment would ensure that the Governor was detached from state politics and able to operate fairly and impartially. Another member argued that the power to appoint should be vested in the President.
One member proposed to wholly replace the Draft Article with ‘The Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.’ He argued that the language of the Draft Article gave too much leeway to the Legislature and restricted the choice of the President. The amendment, he contended, simplified the procedure, and gave the President unfettered right to appoint a Governor. This received the popular support of the Assembly, including members of the Drafting Committee.
The Assembly voted in favour of choosing the Governor by appointment, and accepted the only amendment proposed. The amended Draft Article was adopted on 31st May 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















