






























Seth Govind Das - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Seth Govind Das


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Seth Govind Das
1896 - 1974




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Central Provinces and Berar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: No Formal Education



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Seth Govind Das was born on 16 October 1896 to Diwan Bahadur Jiwan Das and Parvati Bai. Das did not get a formal school education, but was tutored at home from an early age.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
In 1920 Das joined the Indian National Congress. He was involved in the Non-Cooperation movement, protests around Simon Commission, Civil Disobedience movement, and Quit India movement, as a result of which he was arrested multiple times.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Das was elected to the Assembly from Central Provinces and Berar. In the Assembly, he intervened in the debates relating to the ban on cow slaughter, national language, and the national anthem.
Later Contributions
As a seasoned Parliamentarian, Das was the pro tem speaker in the Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Lok Sabhas.
Das passed away in June 1974.
Key Writings
He was an extensive writer; he authored poems, novels, travelogues, plays, biographies and autobiographies. Some of his works include Aatma-Nirikshan’ Smriti Kan, Pandit Motilal Nehru Ki Jeevani, and Desh Ratna Dr. Rajendra Prasad.


 



Key Speeches



Das argued for making Draft Article 38A (present Article 48) which deals with cow slaughter, a fundamental right. Additionally. he sought to expand the scope of the article to prohibit the slaughter of any cow irrespective of its utility.
During the discussion on National language he vehemently argued for adopting Hindi in Devanagri Script. In fact, he wanted the Draft Constitution to have been deliberated and written in Hindi.
Invoking the Irish Constitution, Das noted that the Indian Constitution must include the adoption and description of the national flag



 



Resources



The Destiny Man: Seth Govind Das, Inspiring Glimpses by Dr. Sudhir Saxena (Notion Press, 2019).
A life dedicated: biography of Govind Das by Bhupendra Hooja (Seth Govind Das Diamond Jubilee Celebrations Committee, 1956).
Seth Govinddas Abhinandan Granth by Gulab Rai.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















