






























Article 60: Oath or affirmation by the President - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
60



Oath or affirmation by the President

Every President and every person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of India or, in his absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say—
“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of India.”.



 
 

Version 1




Article 49, Draft Constitution of India 1948
Every President and every person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President shall before entering upon his office make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of India an affirmation or oath in the following form, that is to say-
“I, A. B., do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will faithfully execute the office of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of India.”




Version 2


Article 60, Constitution of India 1950
Every President and every person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of India or, in his absence, the seniormost Judge of the Supreme Court available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say —
“I, A. B., do swear in the name of God solemnly affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of India.”




Summary


The Constituent Assembly debated Draft Article 49 on 27 December 1948. It puts down an oath or affirmation for the President to take before entering his/her office.
A member wanted to explicitly mention ‘God’ in the oath. He was concerned with the lack of invocation of ‘grace and blessing of God’ in the Constitution. The Indian religious and spiritual legacy has given special prominence to God: every religion including Hinduism, Christianity, Islam and Sikhism invoke God in religious texts and ceremonies. He added that the Constitution was sacred and must be offered to God. In opposition, a member argued that this amendment would ‘be excluding those people who have no faith in God at all’. He noted that this amendment would create an ‘obligation on people that they should have faith in God‘.
Another member passed a similar amendment. However, in his proposal ‘agnostics’ were given a choice to not invoke God and just ‘solemnly affirm’. This amendment, he argued, protected a person’s freedom of faith. Mention of ‘God’ in the oath does not impinge on the ‘secularity’ of the Indian State. Further, when a person has taken an oath, they do so in their personal capacity and not as the official head of the State. He also drew on the British and Irish examples to demonstrate how the invocation of God does not lead to communalism.
Generally opposing the use of ‘God’ in the oath, a member argued that it was unnecessary to invoke ‘God’ who is omnipresent. Instead, he urged that oath must be taken in the name of the people of India, as laid out in the Irish Constitution.
There was a proposal to delete the Draft Article. The mover noted that the Constitution was human-made and imperfect, the name of perfect God should not be dragged into the Constitution.
A member put forth a case for including promise to not promote one’s interest and family’s aggrandisement. He highlighted that the values of the Indian freedom struggle must not be ‘copy-book maxim’ but be extended to real life.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee was in support of the inclusion of ‘God’. He believed this would not alter the ‘secular’ state. It was pointed out that the oath did not carry any legal obligations; a person swearing an oath is bound by its ‘purely moral’ obligations. The President must have the liberty to swear in God’s name or otherwise.
The proposal to include God was accepted. The Assembly adopted the Draft Article on 27 December 1948.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















