






























Article 270: Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the States - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part XII

Article
270



Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the States

(1) All taxes and duties referred to in the Union List, except the duties and taxes referred to in articles 268 and 269, respectively, surcharge on taxes and duties referred to in article 271 and any cess levied for specific purposes under any law made by Parliament shall be levied and collected by the Government of India and shall be distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2).
(2) Such percentage, as may be prescribed, of the net proceeds of any such tax or duty in any financial year shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax or duty is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in such manner and from such time as may be prescribed in the manner provided in clause (3).
(3) In this article, “prescribed” means, —
(i) until a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order, and
(ii) after a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order after considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission.



 
 

VERSION 1




Article 251, Draft Constitution of India 1948
(1) Taxes on income other than agricultural income shall be levied and collected by the Government of India and distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2) of this article.
(2) Such percentage, as may be prescribed, of the net proceeds in any financial year of any such tax, except in so far as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to States for the time being specified in Part II of the First Schedule or the taxes payable in respect of Union emoluments, shall not form part of the revenues of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in such manner and from such time as may be prescribed.
(3) For the purposes of clause (2) of this article, in each financial year such percentage as may be prescribed of so much of the net proceeds of taxes on income as does not represent the net proceeds of taxes payable in respect of Union emoluments shall be deemed to represent proceeds attributable to States for the time being specified in Part II of the First Schedule.
(4) In this article-
(a) “Taxes on income” includes any sum levied by the Government of India in lieu of any tax on income as referred to in clause (a) of the proviso to article 266 of this Constitution but does not include a corporation tax;
(b) “Prescribed” means-
(i) Until a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order, and
(ii) After a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order after considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission.
(c) “Union emoluments” includes all emoluments and pensions payable out of the revenues of India in respect of which income-tax is chargeable.




VERSION 2


Article 270, Constitution of India 1950
(1) Taxes on income other than agricultural income shall be levied and collected by the Government of India and distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2).
⁠(2) Such percentage, as may be prescribed, of the net proceeds in any financial year of any such tax, except in so far as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to States specified in Part C of the First Schedule or to taxes payable in respect of Union emoluments, shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in such manner and from such time as may be prescribed.
(3) For the purposes of clause (2), in each financial year such percentage as may be prescribed of so much of the net proceeds of taxes on income as does not represent the net proceeds of taxes payable in respect of Union emoluments shall be deemed to represent proceeds attributable to States specified in Part C of the First Schedule.
⁠(4) In this article—

(a) “taxes on income” does not include a corporation tax;
(b) “prescribed” means—


(i) until a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order, and
(ii) after a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order after considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission;

⁠(c) “Union emoluments” includes all emoluments and pensions payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of which income-tax is chargeable.




SUMMARY


Draft Article 251 (Article 270, Constitution of India 1950) was discussed on 5 August 1949. It laid down the manner of collection and distribution of of income taxes between the Union and States. This Draft Article provided that the taxes on income excluding agricultural income would be collected by the Union government and then distributed between the Union and States in accordance with this provision. The percentage and manner of distribution of such revenues would be prescribed by the President on considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission.
A Member proposed that a minimum percentage of revenue and manner of distribution be detailed within the Draft Article itself. He believed that this fixed percentage would provide certainty to State Governments and enable them to plan their budget. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee argued that the Constitution should not prescribe a fixed percentage of revenue share for the States, the President should decide. The amendment was withdrawn after the Chairman’s response.
Another member proposed that Parliament by law should determine the amount and manner of distribution of the taxes between the Union and States instead of the President. He felt that the recommendations of the Finance Commission must be debated in the Parliament and an appropriate legislation must be passed. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee opposed this amendment because it would create conflict among representatives of various States. He also believed that the distribution may not be just as some states would have more representatives in the Parliament than others. The Assembly rejected the amendment.
The Assembly accepted a minor amendment to replace the words ‘revenues of India’ with ‘Consolidated Fund of India’.
Draft Article 251, as amended was adopted on 5 August 1949.
Article 270 was amended in 2000 to cover all taxes and duties referred to in the Union List-except stamp duties, tax on sale or purchase of goods and services, surcharge on certain taxes and cess collected for specific purposes.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















