






























Govind Malaviya - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Govind Malaviya


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Govind Malaviya
1902 - 1961




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Govind Malaviya was born on 14 September 1902. He was the youngest son of Madan Mohan Malaviya (a political leader and educationist). Malaviya completed his schooling at the Dharmajnyanopadesha Sanskrit Pathshala and A. V. School, Allahabad. He then graduated from Banaras Hindu University. 
Role in India’s Independence Movement
He was involved in politics from a young age, arguably influenced by his father. Malaviya joined the Congress in 1920. In 1930, Malaviya was appointed the General Secretary of the All -India Congress Committee. He participated in the Second Round Table Conference in London (1931). Later, he served as the General Secretary at the All-Parties Unity Conference in Allahabad (1932). 
Malaviya also engaged in activism. He was imprisoned eight times for his involvement in various political movements against the British. Interestingly, his family was also actively involved in the Indian independence movement – his wife, Usha Malviya was arrested for participating in the protest against the Jallianwala Bagh massacre.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Malaviya was elected to the Constituent Assembly from United Provinces on a Congress party ticket. He spoke on issues such as the election of the President, periodical review of the Constitution, and reservations. 
Later Contributions
Following the footsteps of his father, Malaviya continued his political and educational work post-independence as well.  In pursuance of his educational efforts, he was appointed the Vice-Chancellor of Banaras Hindu University (1948 – 1951). After 1951, he played an active role in electoral politics and was elected as a Member of Parliament (1952 – 1957) from the Sultanpur constituency in Uttar Pradesh.
He passed away on 27 February 1961.


 



Key Speeches



When the Draft Constitution was tabled, Malaviya expressed a few concerns such as his objection to electing the President by means of a single transferable vote instead of a direct vote.
He proposed to include a provision for ending reservations for backward classes prior to the expiry of ten years after the Constitution comes into force. He noted that the discretion to end reservations would lie with the members of the backward classes. 
Malaviya recommended that there must be a provision for periodical review and amendment of the Constitution. He further observed that the process for amendments to the Constitution should be difficult and rigid to prevent misuse of the amendment provisions



 



Resources



Address by Pandit Govind Malaviya, Vice-Chancellor, Banaras Hindu University on the Occasion of the Second Anniversary Meeting, National Geographical Society of India



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















