






























Raghu Vira - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Raghu Vira


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Raghu Vira
1902 - 1963




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress, Jana Sangh
Constituency: Central Provinces and Berar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Doctorate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Raghu Vira was born on 30 December 1902 in Rawalpindi in the present-day Punjab province of Pakistan. He was highly educated and trained as a linguist, having completed his MA in Lahore, Ph.D. in London and D.Litt. from Leiden University, Netherlands. After completing his doctoral research in Indic Studies, Vira went on multiple study trips to Europe. In one such trip to Europe in 1928 he wrote about the similarity between the Indian and Romani people, particularly the similarities between Hindi/Sanskrit and the Romani language.  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Vira was a dedicated Congress Party member for most of his life prior to independence and immediately after. Despite his association with the Congress, neither did he hold any prominent posts within the party nor was he involved in any of its organizational and decision-making bodies.  
Ideologically, he fell within the Hindu-Hindi extremist wing of the Congress that included others such as Purushottam Das Tandon and Govind Das Seth. This was on full display when he opposed the Hindu Code Bill, advocated for the supremacy of the Hindi language, and wanted cow slaughter banned.  
In 1932, he established the International Academy of Indian Culture. This was initially set up in Lahore, then moved to Nagpur just before partition, and later shifted to Delhi.  
Contribution to Constitution Making
Vira was a Hindu-Hindi extremist and was part of the group within the Constituent Assembly that Granville Austin refers to as the Hindi-wallahs. Alongside other Hindi nationalists, he submitted numerous amendments to the language provisions in the Draft Constitution. One of the amendments proposed to make the English Constitution obsolete after a period of five years and ban the use of English in Parliament, Legislatures, and State administration within five years.  
He joined the Assembly only in 1949, obtaining a seat through his connection with fellow Hindi hardliner, Ravi Shankar Shukla, the then Prime Minister of the Central Provinces. Thus, he became part of the Assembly from the province of Central Provinces and Berar on a Congress Party ticket.  
He was an important member of the Constituent Assembly’s Hindi committee tasked with translating the Constitution into Hindi. He aggressively opposed the inclusion of supporters of Hindustani as the national language within the committee. It had its first meeting on 1 November 1947 and completed the Hindi translation by June 1948. The translation was received with much criticism from the likes of Jawaharlal Nehru for its extreme Sanskritization and the resultant incomprehensibility.  
Later Contributions
In 1955, Vira was invited by the Chinese authorities, including by the then Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai, to a three-month study expedition in Dunhuang with academics and scholars from Peking University, the Academy of Sciences, and the Dunhuang Institute. He went there with the intention of exploring Mongol and Tibetan manuscripts for his research on Buddhism and Hinduism. But he came back with a strong anti-China sentiment, disillusioned by the Chinese annexation of Tibet and its capture of Ladakh.  
Vira’s differences with the Congress leadership, especially Nehru, began here. In fact, there was a war of words between the Nehru government and Vira regarding the manuscripts he had gained access to in China. Nehru and Subimal Dutt (Foreign Secretary) believed that the documents received by Vira from the Chinese authorities were on behalf of the Indian Government and hence, they were to be rightfully housed in the National Museum and not remain in Vira’s personal capacity.  
Eventually, he cut his ties with Congress in December 1961 and joined the Jana Sangh the very same month. He soon assumed the President’s post within the party and stood for the 1962 elections to the Lok Sabha on a Jana Sangh Party ticket. 
Vira was elected to the Rajya Sabha twice – first in 1952 for a four-year stint and next in 1962 for the entirety of his six-year term.  
He was killed in a car accident on 13 August 1963. 
Key Writings
Vira was a linguist and scholar of great repute, authoring numerous books including dictionaries, glossaries, books, articles, and booklets throughout his life.  
Some of the Dictionaries he put together are The Great English-Indian Dictionary (1944-51), An exhaustive English-Sanskrit-Hindi dictionary (1952) and Mongol-Sanskrit dictionary, with a Sanskrit-Mongol index (1959). 


 



Key Speeches



Raghu Vira went on a long tirade in the Assembly on the absence of Indian culture within the constitution. He was particularly disturbed by the exclusion of the word Dharma and suggested that it be included within the Preamble.  
Vira was furious that the Parliament would not have the power to make powers for the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
He zealously argued for a complete ban on cow slaughter. 



 



Resources



Professor Raghuvira’s expedition to China by Lokesh Chandra and S.D. Singhal (International Academy of Indian Culture, 1969) 
Raghuvira-Sraddhanjali: homage to Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira, explorer, scholar and patriot by International Academy of Indian Culture (1965) 
Rajya Sabha Members Biographical Sketches 1952-2019 (Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi) 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















