






























C. Subramaniam - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										C. Subramaniam


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
C. Subramaniam
1910 - 2000




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Chidambaram Subramaniam was born on 30th January 1910 in Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu. He went on to obtain a degree in physics from Presidency College, University of Madras, after which he studied law at Madras Law College. He began his career as a lawyer and went on to join politics. As a member of the Indian National Congress, he went on to assume important positions within the party, including the President of the Coimbatore District Congress Committee and Member of the Working Committee of the State Congress Committee.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Subramanian was involved in India’s fight for freedom and actively participated in the Quit India movement. His involvement in the Independence movement saw him incarcerated in 1932 and 1941.
Contribution to Constitution Making
He was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras. In the Assembly, he spoke on debates around freedom of trade and commerce.
Later Contributions
Post-independence Subramaniam was elected to the Madras Legislative Assembly and held a Cabinet position. Subsequently, he was elected to the Lok Sabha for two terms 1962—67 and 1971—77. During his time in the Parliament, he held the Cabinet Ministry position of Steel and Mines, Agriculture, Finance, and Defence.
As the Agriculture Minister in 1965, he transformed the agricultural landscape in India by initiating the ‘Green Revolution’. Under this scheme, newly developed High-Yielding Varieties of seeds were brough in which greatly enhanced India’s foodgrains production.
Later on, he served as the Governor of Maharashtra between 1990 and 1993.
Subramaniam was awarded the Bharat Ratna Award in 1998 and passed away two years later on 7 November 2000.
Key Writings
His works include War on Poverty, The New Strategy in Indian Agriculture, and The India of My Dreams.


 



Key Speeches



During debates around Article 19 of the Constitution of India, 1950, Subramaniam was not convinced with ‘freedom of trade and commerce’ was listed as one of the freedoms.
During the final readings of the Constitution, he was concerned that the Constitution was State-centric as opposed to the Gandhian way of individual-centric.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















