






























Anugrah Narayan Sinha - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Anugrah Narayan Sinha


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Anugrah Narayan Sinha
1887 - 1957




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Popularly known as ‘Bihar Vibhuti’, Anugrah Narayan Sinha was born on 18 June 1887 in Gaya, Bihar. His political journey is considered to have shaped Bihar’s political history.
Sinha completed his schooling in his hometown and went on to graduate with an M.A. in history from the University of Calcutta in 1914. After his M.A.,  Sinha was appointed as a history professor in T.N J College, Bhagalpur. During his tenure, he organised flood relief work in Bhagalpur. In 1916 he enrolled with the Patna Bar. 
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Sinha was an ardent follower of Gandhi who inspired him to join the Indian independence movement. He led satyagraha movements in Bihar. 
He was an active member of the Congress Party. In 1922 he helped organise the Gaya Congress. A year later, he became one of the General Secretaries of the All India Congress Committee. Soon after, he was elected as the General Secretary of the Bihar Congress Committee.
Apart from his administrative roles with the Congress party, Sinha also played an important political role – he was elected as a member of the Central Council in 1935 from Sahabad-cum-Patna constituency. A year later he became a member of the Bihar Legislative Assembly and was appointed as the Deputy Premier and Finance Minister of Bihar province. After his resignation from the Bihar Legislative Assembly in 1939 protesting India’s involvement in the Second World War, he worked on earthquake relief programs in Bihar. 
Sinha was involved in many political movements such as the civil disobedience movement in 1930 and Satyagraha (1940–41) which got him arrested. 
Contribution to Constitution making
Sinha was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 from Bihar on a Congress party ticket. He did not actively engage in the Assembly debates and discussions. 
Later Contributions
A political stalwart in Bihar, Sinha was elected to the first Bihar Legislative Assembly post-independence in 1952. 
He led many development projects in Bihar along with the then Chief Minister Krishna Sinha including several river valley projects. During the first five-year plan period his development activities were focused on the agricultural sector and he was praised by the Union government for his leadership. 
Sinha’s work extended to India’s international affairs – he led the Indian Food and Agriculture delegation to Nepal and the Indian delegation to the International Labour Organization (ILO) in Canada and Switzerland. 
Sinha passed away on 5 July 1957. He is still fondly remembered as one of the most important political leaders in Bihar. Jayaprakash Narayan who served as the Chairman of Anugraha Smarak Nidhi (Anugrah Memorial Fund) stated that Sinha was a rare soul whose contributions are eternal. The Department of Posts issued a stamp in his memory.


 



Resources



Select Speeches of Dr. Anugrah Narayan Sinha in the Legislature (1937-1957), Directorate of Bihar State Archive (2013)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















