






























Constitution in the Classroom #4.2: Worksheet on Uniform Civil Code - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Learn
								 ≫ 
										Constitution in the Classroom #4.2: Worksheet on Uniform Civil Code


 
















Constitution in the Classroom #4.2: Worksheet on Uniform Civil Code



Learn







23 February 2023

Share








Introduction
Welcome to this learning module where we will delve into the Uniform Civil Code—an envisioned set of laws that aims to regulate family and personal matters for individuals, irrespective of their religious, faith or caste identities.
Currently, personal laws derived from religious doctrines govern these aspects, including marriage, divorce, adoption, child custody, inheritance, and more. However, the Uniform Civil Code seeks to establish a uniform set of laws that applies consistently to all citizens in Indian society.
Article 44 of the Constitution of India endorses the idea of a Uniform Civil Code, stating, “The State shall endeavor to secure for citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.”
Why did our Constitution-Framers include this provision?
Assignment
Please complete the attached worksheet, which will enable you to trace the contours of the debate in the Constituent Assembly regarding the Uniform Civil Code. The questions are designed to encourage you to engage with a variety of primary and secondary materials available on the site. These materials may include transcripts of the Constituent Assembly Debates, biographies of our Constitution Framers, and Historical Constitutions, which can be accessed through the advanced search function.
Note to Educators
We recommend that you juxtapose contemporary strands of arguments on the uniform civil code with those discovered by the students from the Constituent Assembly Debates and allow them to identify similarities and differences. Additionally, you could encourage students to locate these arguments within their respective historical, social, and political contexts.

Tags Uniform Civil CodeReligion 








Resources


Worksheet on Uniform Civil Code












Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More learn posts




 

Constitution in the Classroom #4.3: Worksheet on Ban on Cow Slaughter

05 August 2018
												• 
																									Worksheet




Undergraduate





 

Constitution in the Classroom #3.1: Worksheet on Religion and Personal Law

10 August 2018
												• 
																									Worksheet




Grade 9-12

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















