






























Transfer of Power: The Delayed Announcement of the Boundaries of India and Pakistan - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Transfer of Power: The Delayed Announcement of the Boundaries of India and Pakistan


 
















Transfer of Power: The Delayed Announcement of the Boundaries of India and Pakistan



Blog



Vineeth Krishna
									 and 									Varsha Nair






30 August 2022

Share









 
									Mountbatten in a meeting with Nehru, Jinnah and others to plan Partition.
Image credit: Wikimedia Commons								

On the evening of 13 August 1947, Sir Cyril Radcliffe submitted a report to the Viceroy of India, Lord Mountbatten, that settled the territorial boundaries of India and Pakistan. Radcliffe was the Chairman of the Boundary Commissions that partitioned Bengal and Punjab between the two countries – referred to as the Commissions ‘awards’.
One would have expected Mountbatten to then announce the awards at once, so that Indians and Pakistanis would know the exact contours of their territories while celebrating their respective independence days.
But he didn’t. He said nothing either during his visit to Karachi to witness the Independence Day celebrations in Pakistan or in the Indian Constituent Assembly where he gave a speech as India’s first Governor General on her Independence Day. In fact, Mountbatten went to the extent of not looking at the report when it was submitted to him on the evening of 12 August 1947. British archives tell us why.
A Refugee Train during Partition.Image credit: Wikimedia Commons
In the days leading up to 15 August, Mountbatten regularly wrote ‘Top Secret and Personal’ reports to the King and the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, keeping them posted on the political churning that they had sent him to oversee. One of these reports reveals how utterly fearful he was about disclosing the reports of the boundary commissions.
He expressed his concern that no matter what, Indians and Pakistanis would not be pleased with the awards and the British, as they had over the past year, would come under even more criticism and public and international wrath. This would be blunted if the award was announced at a later date.
Mountbatten wasn’t alone in his desire to postpone the announcement. In the days that preceded the Indian Independence Day, the Viceroy and his staff including his Reforms Commissioner V.P. Menon, took great administrative pains to deliberately delay the publication of the awards.
Cyril Radcliffe.Image credit: Wikimedia Commons
V.P. Menon also advised him that revealing the awards of the Boundary Commissions any day prior to 15 August and without consulting Indian and Pakistani leaders was a bad idea. It would mean that all the scheduled events of the Indian and Pakistani Independence Day might crash, including the possibility that the (now historical) Indian Constituent Assembly meeting at midnight of 15 August might not happen. All this would only sabotage Britain’s future relations with the 2 countries and risk the already precarious transfer of power.
It was only on 17 August 1947, that the awards were published and Indians and Pakistanis knew how to identify their countries on a map. The delay in the British to reveal the Boundary Commissions’ awards, again adds to the view that the British transfer of power to India was primarily informed by British interests, particularly to protect herself from criticism and contempt from those at home and the world at large.

Tags PakistanPartitionTransfer of Power 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















