






























Constitution in the Classroom: Sessions with the Students of Amber Valley School - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Constitution in the Classroom: Sessions with the Students of Amber Valley School


 



Workshop
Constitution in the Classroom: Sessions with the Students of Amber Valley School
Navami Krishnamurthy









										10 Jun										- 									
11 Jun

2022


Workshop



 Venue
Amber Valley School, Chikkamagalur


Share








On 10th and 11th June 2022, the ConstitutionofIndia.net team conducted a series of workshops for grades 1-12 of the Amber Valley School in Chikkamagalur, Karnataka. The main aim of the workshops was to inculcate a basic understanding of the Constitution and its functions.

Jigsaw puzzle activity for the students of grades 1-3
Grades 1-3
The workshop began with a jigsaw puzzle activity, where the students, arranged pieces of the jigsaw to reveal the wordings of the Preamble. CLPR’s resource person introduced the Preamble as the first page of the ‘Rule Book’ of the country, which is the Constitution. Important words and phrases such as ‘Sovereign’, ‘Democratic’, ‘Republic’ and ‘We the People of India’ were introduced and discussed by drawing parallels to real-world examples. This session concluded with a homework for students to create a Preamble for their respective classes.
Grades 4-5
The workshop began with CLPR’s resource person asking why we need a Constitution. An analogy of a conflict in a game of football, where the referee interprets the rules of football to give instructions was given. This was correlated to the Constitution as a rulebook, interpreted by the Chief Justice of India, similar to a football referee. The CLPR video was played that showcased the formation of the Constitution.
After this, Fundamental Rights were introduced. A video of police persons dispersing peaceful protesters during the Indian freedom struggle was played to the students, and they were asked to identify which section of the Fundamental Right under Article 19 had been violated. A second video showcasing Gandhi’s trial for bail, where he was arrested for travelling within the country, was also shown to highlight the violation of the right to movement and to reside under Article 19. A third video displaying the Indian protestors during the freedom struggle was shown to describe the freedom to assemble peacefully and without arms. The students were able to correctly identify all the sub-rights under Article 19. CLPR’s resource person explained that these Fundamental Rights were inserted deliberately because the framers of the Constitution had experienced the deprivation of such rights during their struggles.
The session concluded with a fun activity where students were divided into groups and were asked to pick a sub-right under Article 19. They were asked to think, discuss and draw their ideas of what the world would look like if these rights that they picked did not exist today. The students came up with creative expressions of their notions on an India without these rights and freedoms.
Grades 6-8
The workshop was conducted similar to the workshop conducted for Grades 4 and 5.
The concept of Fundamental Rights was introduced. The students could more comfortably identify the sub-rights under Article 19 that were violated in the videos that were shown to them. After this, CLPR’s resource person, through the analogy of student-activist Disha Ravi from Bangalore, illustrated how the Constitution works towards protecting the Fundamental Rights of its citizens.
The session ended with a short quiz on Indian Constitution and Political history, where the questions were carefully chosen with the intention to promote discovery and learning about the Indian Constitution and its history. Some students were able to answer these questions.
Grades 9-12
The students were first introduced to how the Constitution was drafted. The CLPR’s resource person articulated on how there existed Constitutions before 1946 such as the Government of India Act 1935.
The next segment of the workshop involved the students in a debate where they were asked to deliberate on arguments on whether free speech should be restricted. Students came up with interesting points such as limited restriction of Fundamental Rights based on rational principles. Some were against any restrictions to be imposed on such rights.
At the end of the discussion, it was pointed out that the nature of deliberations by the student groups were similar to those that happened within the Constituent Assembly. CLPR’s resource person elaborated on the similar discourse on Free Speech that happened during the Constituent Assembly debated on Draft Article 13 (Article 19). Arguments by members of the Assembly such as Sir TT Krishnamachari, Sir Brajeshwar Prasad, Sardar Bhopinder Singh and Damodar Swarup Seth on free speech were briefly discussed. The attempt was made to show that the legitimacy of the Indian Constitution comes from the nature of deliberation that took place during the Constitution making process. This session was subsequently concluded.


This event blog post was authored by our intern Navami Krishnamurthy, a fourth year BA LLB student at O.P. Jindal Global University



Suggested Reading


Article 19: Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of Speech, etc.



Preamble






More in events





 Workshop



Indian Constitutional History Workshop
 National School of Journalism and Public Discourse, Bangalore



Event Report


25 Jun
2022







 Workshop



How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?
 Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai



Event Report


17 Sep
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















