






























Shriman Narayan Agarwal - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Shriman Narayan Agarwal


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Shriman Narayan Agarwal
1912 - 1974




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madhya Bharat
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Shriman Narayan Agarwal was born on 15 June 1912 at Etawah in present-day Uttar Pradesh. He studied at the A.P. Mission High School and went on to pursue higher education at Agra College and University of Allahabad (M.A. in English and Economics).
He was appointed the Principal of Seksaria College of Commerce in Wardha, Madhya Pradesh.
Agarwal travelled extensively as a part of an educational tour and that included China, Japan, Belgium, France, Hawaii and United States of America.
He was an avid writer and published poetry in both Hindi and English. His other hobbies included gardening.
Role in Indian Independence Movement
Agarwal was immensely inspired by MK Gandhi and joined the Indian independence movement at a young age. He was a member of the Working Committee of Indian Youth Congress. Agarwal then enrolled as a member of the Indian National Congress. In 1942, he was imprisoned for his involvement in the Quit India Movement. He was also influenced by Vinobha Bhave who was an Indian philosopher know for land re-distribution efforts.
Agarwal was educationist and worked on many educational programs and policies. He was the Secretary of the University Section, All India Education Conference. He also served as the member of the All India Board of Technical Studies and Business Administration (1948). Agarwal was appointed as the Dean of the Faculty of Commerce, Nagpur University (1951).
In 1946, Agarwal wrote and published the Gandhian Constitution of Free India based on Gandhian ideas. Gandhi was not involved in writing the book, though he agreed with everything it contained and even wrote a foreword.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Agarwal was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1948 from Madhya Pradesh on a Congress party ticket. He did not participate in the Assembly debates.
Later Contributions
After India became independent, Agarwal continued to work in the education sector. He was the member of Education Reconstruction Committee, Government of Madhya Pradesh (1951-52), State Planning Board, Madhya Pradesh (1951).
At the Union, he played a key role crucial role in the Planning Commission and drafting the Five-year plans. In 1951 Agarwal was appointed as a member of the Social Welfare Panel, Planning Commission, Government of India,
Agarwal was elected as the first member of Parliament from Kanpur to the Lok Sabha in 1952. He was later appointed as the Governor of Gujarat (1967-73).
He passed away in 1974.
Key Writings
Most of Agarwal’s work was based on Gandhian principles. Agarwal preferred a decentralised economic framework with a self-sustained village model. He was also interested in poetry. His key works include:

Gandhian Constitution for Free India, 1946
Gandhian Plan of Economic Development for India, 1944 – This plan focused on agriculture.
Fountain of Life (1933): A collection of English Poems
The Two Worlds: An account of his world tour
Roti Ka Rag (Collection of Hindi Poems)
Jugnoo: Short Essays in Hindi
Article titled Aap bhale to jag bhala which is studied in schools even today.



 



Resources



Audio clippings from an interview of Shriman Narayan Agarwal by Uma Shanker
Who’s Who 1952 (Parliament Secretariat, December 1952)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















