






























Jerome D'Souza - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Jerome D’Souza


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Jerome D’Souza
1897 - 1977




Key Information

Party: 
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Christian
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Rev. Jerome D’Souza was born on 6 August 1897 in Mangalore. He received a degree in English literature at the University of Madras. Subsequently, he taught for a while at St. Joseph’s College in Tiruchirappalli before deciding to enter the Society of Jesus on 29 May 1921. He was ordained as a priest in Belgium in 1931. Soon after, D’Souza was appointed as the Principal of his alma mater, St. Joseph’s College, Tiruchirappalli. During this time, he came in contact with nationalist leaders like Nehru and C. Rajagopalachari.
In April 1938 he was named a Rector – the first Indian to achieve this feat. In 1942, he was transferred to Loyola College in Chennai and appointed as the Rector and Principal.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
D’Souza was not directly involved with the freedom movement.
During D’Souza’s tenure at Loyola College, he was appointed to the War Reconstruction Committee to plan post-war education schemes.
Impressed by his work on education and his oratory skills, C. Rajagopalachari proposed his name to the Madras Legislative Assembly.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
D’Souza was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 from the Madras Presidency. He made important interventions on various topics including language, minority rights and reservation.
Later Contributions:
D’Souza had command over multiple languages such as French, Spanish, English and Dutch, which came in handy when he led diplomatic negotiations on behalf of the Nehru Government .
In 1949, D’Souza was nominated by Nehru to be a part of the Indian Delegation to the General Assembly of the United Nations – he participated in four sessions.
He was involved in negotiations with the Vatican Church on control over churches in India. D’Souza also negotiated with the French government on the peaceful transfer of French colonies to independent India.
In continuation of his work on education, in 1951 he established Xavier Board of Higher Education in India. D’Souza also established the Indian Social Institute.
D’Souza passed away on 12 August 1977. The Government of India honoured him on his birth centenary by issuing a postal stamp in his name in 1997.
Key Writings:

Sardar Panikkar and the Christian Missions (1957)
The Church and Civilization (1967)
Speeches and Writings of Rev. Fr. Jerome D’Souza (1972)



 



Key Speeches



D’Souza supported the Munshi-Ayyanger formula on the official language issue. He advocated for Hindi as the official language since he wanted a universal language to be adopted in India and Hindi was a suitable compromise. He believed Hindi could evolve to become the national language in the years to come.
He believed that if the fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution are enforced, there would be no need for separate minority rights as the minority interests are safeguarded in the fundamental rights provisions.
When discussing reservation in elections for minorities, he opposed the proposition to have reservation of seats for religious minorities. He trusted that the majority community would be responsible in upholding the principles of democracy.



 



Resources



A Great Indian Jesuit, Fr. Jerome D’Souza 1897-1977: Priest, Educationist, and Statesman by V. Lawrence Sundaram (1986)
Speeches and Writings of Rev. Fr. Jerome D’Souza by Jerome D’Souza (1972)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















