






























12 Dec 1946 Archives - Constitution of India




















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Debates
								 ≫ 
												Volume 1
								 ≫ 
										12 Dec 1946


 








View all volumes



X


Volume 1


Volume 2


Volume 3


Volume 4


Volume 5


Volume 6


Volume 7


Volume 8


Volume 9


Volume 10


Volume 11


Volume 12











CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES
Volume 1
12 Dec 1946


Speakers


											Rajendra Prasad										

											Hriday Nath Kunzru										

											Satyanarayan Sinha										



Hindi 


Kannada 




















 




Table of contents



										Resolution on Aims and Objects of the Assembly by Jawaharlal Nehru - Discussion Postponed									
















The Constituent Assembly of India met in the Constitution Hall, New Delhi, at Eleven of the Clock, Mr. Chairman (The Hon’ble Dr. Rajendra Prasad) in the Chair.





1.4.1


								Chairman							


If there are any Members who have not yet signed the Register, they may do so now.
























(Nobody came forward.)





1.4.2


								Chairman							


It seems there is nobody who has not yet signed. We now proceed to the next item. The first item that we have is a Resolution by Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru. I understand that there are some Members who feel that they have not had sufficient time to consider this important Resolution. There is no doubt that the Resolution is a very important one and I would not like any Member to feel that he has not had sufficient time to consider it fully. If the House so desires, I am prepared to adjourn this discussion till tomorrow.



















1.4.3


								Several Members							


Yes.



















1.4.4


								Chairman							


Then there is another matter in this connection in regard to which I should like the advice of the House. We have got a Rules Committee and its members should meet to prepare the Rules which they will place before us. They should have time separate from the general session of the Assembly. If you agree, they will meet after this House is adjourned and we shall do as much as we can do. But if it cannot complete the work, the Rules Committee will have to meet tomorrow, and I would like to know whether the House would like to sit in the morning from 11 or in the afternoon because I would suggest that we should have one session only, either in the morning or afternoon, so that the Rules Committee may get the other half of the day for its work. If the House want the morning session, then we can meet in the morning.



















1.4.5


								Several Members							


We want morning sessions.



















1.4.6


								Several Members							


Afternoon sessions.



















1.4.7


								Chairman							


I am afraid in this matter it is difficult for me to come to a decision. I have to trouble the members to raise their hands-those who would like the morning sessions may please raise their hands.
























(More members raised their hands in favour of the morning session.)





1.4.8


								Chairman							


It seems the morning session is preferred by a large number of people. We shall have the session at 11 tomorrow morning concerning this Resolution and in the afternoon we may have, if necessary a meeting of the Rules Committee. If any Members have got any amendment to the Resolution to move, I would request them to hand over the amendments to the Secretary in the course of the day and we shall take up the discussion tomorrow. The Secretary will take care, if possible, to circulate the amendments also to Members.



















1.4.9


								Unnamed Member							


Are we sitting on Saturday ?



















1.4.10


								Chairman							


I think we should be sitting on Saturday. That is my view but that is entirely in the hands of the House. I think we will be sitting on Saturday too.



















1.4.11


								Hriday Nath Kunzru							


I think we should not meet on Saturday. Let us have a day off for quiet discussions of the problems between ourselves.



















1.4.12


								Sri Prakasa							


I think we should not meet on Sundays and that should be sufficient for quiet discussions for Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru.



















1.4.13


								Chairman							


We shall consider that tomorrow. So far as the House is concerned, I think we have to adjourn now till 11 A.M. tomorrow and I would like the Members of the Rules Committee to meet say half-an-hour later. In the meantime we shall fix up some room where they shall meet.



















1.4.14


								Chairman							


The House stands adjourned till 11 A.M. tomorrow.



















1.4.15


								Hari Singh Gour							


It seems to me that it will serve a useful purpose if the Hon’ble Mover of the Resolution formally moves and expresses his views to enable the Members here to understand the full import of the Resolution, so that we can frame amendments accordingly and these can be taken up tomorrow or the day after.



















1.4.16


								Satyanarayan Sinha							


The House has, already been adjourned.



















1.4.17


								Chairman							


Sir Hari Singh Gour has suggested that the Resolution might be moved by the Mover today who in his speech could explain his own point of view so that the other Members may be in possession of that and the discussion might take place tomorrow. I had myself at first thought of that but then I felt that the members would like to consider the whole thing tomorrow.



















1.4.18


								Several Members							


Tomorrow.



















1.4.19


								Chairman							


There seems to be a difference of opinion and I do not like to take a vote on this question especially as I have already declared the House adjourned. So we shall now adjourn. The House stands adjourned till tomorrow, 11 O’Clock.
























The Assembly then adjourned till Eleven of the Clock, on Friday, the 13th December, 1946.



 








Previous


11 Dec 1946 | Volume 1







Next



13 Dec 1946 | Volume 1

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















