






























Article 338B: National Commission for Backward Classes - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part XVI

Article
338B



National Commission for Backward Classes

(1) There shall be a Commission for the socially and educationally backward classes to be known as the National Commission for Backward Classes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the socially and educationally backward classes under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the socially and educationally
backward classes;
(c) to participate and advise on the socio-economic development of the socially and educationally backward classes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports the recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the socially and educationally backward classes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the socially and educationally backward classes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the State Government which shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, it any, of any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely :—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting the socially and educationally backward classes:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply for the purposes of clause (3) of article 342A.



 
 

SUMMARY




Article 338B was inserted by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018.
 


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















