






























Beyond Legal Legitimacy: How to Better Engage with Judgments - Constitution of India































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Beyond Legal Legitimacy: How to Better Engage with Judgments


 
















Beyond Legal Legitimacy: How to Better Engage with Judgments



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






21 December 2023

Share









 
The Supreme Court’s judgment in the Article 370 case has triggered intense reactions, with the political context significantly influencing how it is perceived alongside its legal merits. The response has often been entangled in the complexities of legal issues and the historical rights and wrongs that Kashmir has endured.
To evaluate and respond to a Supreme Court judgment, the typical focus centers on its legal merits, ultimately contributing to a perception of the judgment’s legal legitimacy. However, it is essential to consider additional dimensions of legitimacy. In his paper, Richard Fallon introduces moral and sociological legitimacy, rooted in moral considerations and societal acceptance, respectively. Although Fallon initially applies this concept to the evaluation of a constitution, it is applicable to other entities, including judgments. Our Chief Editor, Sudhir Krishnaswamy, has extended this framework to assess the basic structure doctrine.
The concept of legitimacy, viewed in a broader sense beyond mere legal legitimacy, was a consideration in our Constituent Assembly as well. During the early days of crafting the Indian constitution, certain members of the Assembly raised concerns about the legal legitimacy of the Indian Constituent Assembly, given the Muslim League’s boycott. There ensued a debate on whether the Constituent Assembly should proceed with drafting the Constitution or await the participation of the Muslim League. The Cabinet Mission Plan — the that set up the Assembly — was referred to in thes debates. Dr. Ambedkar, however, saw the issue as extending beyond legal matters. He warned the Assembly:
“It may be that you have the right to do so [to move ahead with constitution-making without the League]. The question I am asking is this. Is it prudent for you to do so? Is it wise for you to do so? Power is one thing; wisdom is quite a different thing and I want this House to consider this matter from the point of view, not of what authority is vested in this Constituent Assembly, I want this House to consider the matter from another point of view, namely, whether it would be wise, whether it would be statesmanlike, whether it would be prudent to do so at this stage.”
Ambedkar was alluding to the idea that the legitimacy of the Assembly does not solely rely on its legal credentials. He was highlighting a broader, more moral perspective—questioning whether it is morally or politically sound to undertake constitution-making without the participation of a key political group.
In Justice Kaul’s opinion in  Article 370 judgement, he strikingly suggests the establishment of a ‘truth and reconciliation commission’ akin to post-apartheid South Africa. While not legally binding, this suggestion underscores how moral considerations can hold significance for judges themselves and the broader discourse – enough to even warrant inclusion in a judgement.
Returning to Article 370 case, arguments about its temporary provision fall under legal legitimacy, while contentions about the fairness of repealing Article 370 without consulting the people of Kashmir, irrespective of the legalities involved, constitute moral arguments. Making these distinctions allows us to organise not just arguments in the public sphere but also helps us better respond ourselves to key constitutional developments including judgements.























We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















