






























Hriday Nath Kunzru - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Hriday Nath Kunzru


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Hriday Nath Kunzru
1887 - 1978




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Pandit Hriday Nath Kunzru was born to a Kashmiri family in Agra on 1st October 1887. He received a B.A. from Allahabad University in 1907, followed by a B.Sc in Political Science from the London School of Economics in 1910.
Kunzru was initially a member of the Congress party. Later, he joined the National Liberation Federation, a liberal political party, when it was founded in 1918. He eventually became its President in 1934.
Kunzru was active in politics, and was elected thrice to various legislatures prior to independence: the Legislative Council of the United Provinces, the Central Legislative Assembly, and the Council of States. In 1943, he established the Indian Council for World Affairs along with Tej Bahadur Sapru.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Kunzru was a moderate who fought for self-governance, or dominion status. He was not in favour of the Satyagraha or Non-Cooperation Movements.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Kunzru was elected to the Constituent Assembly India on a Congress Party ticket from United Provinces. In the Assembly, he intervened in debates relating to the provincial government, federalism, and ordinances.
Later Contributions
After independence, Kunzru was elected to the first Rajya Sabha in 1952, where he served for two consecutive terms until 1962. During this time, he was a member of the States Reorganization Commission, which proposed the reorganization of states on linguistic lines. Kunzru also was a member of the University Grants Commission from December 1953-1966. He was made the President of the Board of Governors for the Indian School of International Studies in 1955.
He passed away on 3 April 1978.
Kunzru was honoured with a postage stamp from the Government of India in 1987.


 



Key Speeches



Kunzru defended the federal structure of the constitution, arguing in favour of the autonomy of the Provincial Governments in financial matters.
He proposed that only certain Fundamental Rights be restricted during Emergencies rather than all rights, as proposed by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar.
Additionally, he moved an amendment to reduce the lifespan of ordinances to two weeks from six weeks, to ensure that an ordinance was not in effect for a long period of time without legislative oversight.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















