






























Rafi Ahmed Kidwai - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Rafi Ahmed Kidwai


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Rafi Ahmed Kidwai
1894 - 1954




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Committee on the Rules of ProcedureProvincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Rafi Ahmad Kidwai was born on 18th February 1894 in Masuali Village in Bara Banki district in present-day Uttar Pradesh. He joined the M.A.O college at Aligarh in the year 1916 where he went on to finish his B.A. He then began an L.L.B course in Aligarh but could not write his examinations due to his participation in the Non-Cooperation Movement.
He also worked closely with Motilal Nehru and in 1925, he was elected as one of the secretaries of the U.P Congress. He was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly and served as the chief whip for the Swaraj party, the electoral arm of the Congress, from 1926-1929.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Kidwai was particularly active during the Khilafat movement during the 1920’s, by which time he was a well-known member of the Indian National Congress. He was imprisoned for his part in the Non-Cooperation movement and he was released in 1922.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Kidwai was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress Party ticket. He was a member of two committes: Union Constitution and Rules and Procedure, but did not make any interventions during the debates.
Later Contributions:
After Independence, he was appointed as the first Communications minister and inaugurated the first night air mail service. Subsequently, he held the post of the Agriculture minister.
Kidwai died in the year 1954.
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research created the Rafi Ahmad Kidwai Award in 1956 in his honour.


 



Resources



Rafi Ahmad Kidwai.
Rafi Ahmad Kidwai: The True Nationalist.
Rafi Ahmad Kidwai: His life and Work.
Rafi Ahmad Kidwai: A memoir of his Life and Times.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















