






























Kala Venkata Rao - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Kala Venkata Rao


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Kala Venkata Rao
1900 - 1959




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Telugu
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Kala Venkata Rao was born on 7th July 1900 in Mukkamala in present-day Andhra Pradesh. Rao began studying for his B.A. at Maharaja College, Vizianagaram in 1917. However, he was expelled for publicly criticizing the British. He then shifted to Noble College, Machilipatnam to complete his degree. Rao left Noble College after becoming inspired by Mahatma Gandhi’s call to boycott educational institutions as part of the Non-Cooperation movement.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
After leaving his studies, Rao enthusiastically participated in the freedom struggle. He organised the Salt Satyagraha movement in the East Godavari District. Rao was arrested for drafting the Kurnool circular during the Quit India movement of 1942, which encouraged Indians to practice civil disobedience and non-cooperation to frustrate British authorities.
An active participant in local politics, Rao became Secretary of the District Congress Committee in 1931. He was elected to the Provincial Assembly from Amalapuram twice, in 1937 and 1946, and also held cabinet posts. He later became the Secretary of the All India Congress Committee from 1949 to 1951.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Rao was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Madras constituency on a Congress party ticket. He intervened in the debates on the right to property and the issue of abolition of the Zamindari system.
Later Contributions
Rao was a member of the Partition Committee constituted by the Madras government in 1949, which was created to deliberate on the creation of a new Andhra state. In 1953, he was elected to the Legislative Assembly of the newly-created Andhra state.


 



Key Speeches


Rao spoke in favour of abolishing the Zamindari system, arguing that the right to property did not apply to Zamindars, due to the manner in which they had acquired their land.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















