






























Sub-Committee on the North East Frontier (Assam) Tribal and Excluded Areas - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 







Home
								 ≫ 
												Committees
								 ≫ 
										Sub-Committee on the North East Frontier (Assam) Tribal and Excluded Areas


 






Constitution Making 
Committees

Sub-Committee on the North East Frontier (Assam) Tribal and Excluded Areas




















This sub-committee was set up to review and provide recommendations for special provisions for the administration of the North East Frontier (Assam) Tribal and Excluded Areas.


 





Members




 



 





										J. J. M. Nichols-Roy, 										
										Gopinath Bordoloi 






 




Background


Under the Government of India Act 1935, certain areas in Assam and the North East Frontier tracts had been designated as Excluded or Partially Excluded Areas. These classifications were based on the preponderance of tribal populations in these areas, which therefore merited special administrative arrangements to account for their distinct culture and isolation.
Therefore, the Cabinet Mission Plan which set up the Constituent Assembly, mentioned the tribal and excluded areas as requiring special attention from the Assembly. The sub-committee was set up to fulfil this requirement.




Work Summary


The Sub-Committee was appointed on 27 February 1947 by the Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas, at its very first meeting. Chaired by Gopinath Bordoloi, it also included two members from the North East who were not Constituent Assembly members: Rup Nath Brahma and Mayang Nokcha.
The Sub-Committee began its work with a tour of the North-East region, including visits to the Lushai Hills District, the North-Cachar Hills Sub-Division, the Mikir Hills and the Naga Hills District. At every place, they met representatives of different tribes to ascertain their views on the future administration of the region.
On the basis of their travels, the Sub-Committee prepared an extensive Report that provides an overview of the predominant tribes in the region in an anthropological tone. It recommended various administrative, economic and jurisdictional measures to protect their distinctive culture. These included setting up of District Councils and Regional Councils, autonomy to tribes to continue with their customary laws and justice systems, and protection for forests and minerals.
The Report was submitted to the Advisory Committee for its consideration on 20 July 1947, which recommended the Drafting Committee to incorporate its suggestions in the Draft Constitution.




Key Documents



Report of the North-East Frontier (Assam) Tribal and Excluded Areas Sub-Committee
Joint Report of the Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas (other than Assam) and the North-East Frontier (Assam) Tribal and Excluded Areas Sub-Committees





Resources



The Framing of India’s Constitution, Vol. 3 by B. Shiva Rao
The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation by Granville Austin




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















