






























Languages - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
						 ≫ 
						Schedules
						 ≫ 
						Languages


 








Eight Schedule

Articles 344(1) and 351


Languages





1.


Assamese.




2.


Bengali.




3.


Bodo.




4.


Dogri.




5.


Gujarati.




6.


Hindi.




7.


Kannada




8.


Kashmiri.




9.


Konkani.




10.


Maithili.




11.


Malayalam.




12.


Manipuri.




13.


Marathi.




14.


Nepali.




15.


Odia.




16.


Punjabi.




17.


Sanskrit.




18.


Santhali.




19.


Sindhi.




20.


Tamil.




21.


Telugu.




22.


Urdu.








Version 1


Articles 344 (1) and 351, Constitution of India 1950
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Gujarati.
4. Hindi.
5. Kannada.
6. Kashmiri.
7. Malayalam.
8. Marathi.
9. Oriya.
10.Punjabi.
11. Sanskrit.
12. Tamil.
13. Telugu.
14. Urdu.




Summary


Draft Schedule VII-A (Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India 1950) was discussed in the Constituent Assembly on 12, 13 and 14 September 1949. This Schedule concerned Draft Articles 301B and 301I of the Draft Constitution of Indian 1948. It listed out the official languages of India.
The Draft Schedule was not part of the Draft Constitution 1948. A Drafting Committee member introduced it in the Assembly alongside a new Part XIV-A that dealt with the Language of the Union. The discussions in the Assembly primarily revolved around the inclusion of more languages in the Schedule.
A member wanted the entry Kanarese to be changed to Kannada. He informed the Assembly that Kanarese was a hybrid form of Kannada only used by missionaries and it was more appropriate to use Kannada. A few members insisted that ‘English’ too be added as a language in the Draft Schedule as this was the language of the Anglo-Indian community, who were an integral part of India. Some argued for the inclusion of Sanskrit on the grounds that Sanskrit was India’s ancient language and the best means of recognizing it would be to mention in it in this part of the Constitution. One member pleaded with the Assembly that the Adivasi languages like Mundari, Gondi and Oraon, that are spoken by a significant section of the population also be added to the list. He believed that by including these Adivasi languages, they would be honouring the languages, ‘of the most ancient peoples of this country’.
The Assembly accepted the change from Kanarese to Kannada and also assented to the inclusion of Sanskrit in the Schedule. The Amended Schedule was adopted as a part of the Constitution on 14 September 1949. At the time of adoption, the Draft Schedule contained 14 official languages. Over the years, a number of Constitutional Amendments have expanded this list to now include 22 official languages.















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















