






























John Matthai - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										John Matthai


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
John Matthai
1886 - 1959




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Christian
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Malayalam
Education: Doctorate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Challiyal John Matthai was born on 10th January, 1886 into an orthodox Syrian Christian family in Kozhikode. His graduated with a degree in economics from the Madras Christian College in 1906. In 1908 he joined the Madras Law College, and completed his B.L in 1910. He later pursued his doctoral research at the London School of Economics and Political Science, as well as a B.Litt. from Balliol College, Oxford.
After returning to India in 1918, Matthai became an officer on special duty with the co-operative department of the Madras Government. A keen academic, he also taught economics at Presidency College till 1925. He became an active government servant, who served on the Legislative Council and led important committees and departments relating to finance and statistics. Due to his economic acumen, he was appointed as a Director by Tata in 1940.
Mathai was one of the architects of the Bombay Plan, which was hailed by the then-Viceroy of India Lord Wavell as a solution to India’s economic problems.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Matthai did not play an active role in the freedom struggle. Instead, he devoted himself to government service and academia. He was a member of the Viceroy’s Executive Council, and later was part of the interim government.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Mathai was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress party ticket. He delivered important clarifications in the debates related to taxing provisions. He supported fostering industrial development in the country.
Later Contributions
Post-Independence, he served as India’s first Railway Minister. After the presentation of the first budget in 1948, he was appointed as the Finance Minister. He presented two budgets between the years 1949-51, post which he resigned following protests regarding the vesting of huge powers in the hands of the erstwhile planning commission.
After his resignation, he was the chairman of two entities in succession: the Taxation Enquiry Committee, and the newly constituted State Bank of India. He then became the Vice Chancellor of Bombay University (1955-57), and later of Kerala University (1957-59). As a result of his contributions to the field of education and public service, he was conferred the Padma Vibhushan in 1959.
Mathai passed away in the year 1959.
Key Writings
As an academic, Mathai was a keen writer with a number of publications. His most well-known writings include Prisons of our mind and the Road to freedom, Village Government in British India, and India and the War.


 



Key Speeches


Mathai intervened in the debate surrounding Article 264, clarifying the scope of the provision and arguing in favour of modifying the system of direct taxation.


 



Resources


Dr. John Matthai: A biography


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















