






























Sub-Committee I (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee) - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 







Home
								 ≫ 
												Committees
								 ≫ 
										Sub-Committee I (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee)


 






Constitution Making 
Committees

Sub-Committee I (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee)




















This sub-committee was appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee to discuss the matter of a special electoral college for the election of the Governor, and the rights and privileges of members of Provincial Legislatures.


 





Members




 



 



 





										B.G. Kher, 										
										Kailash Nath Katju, 										
										P. Subbarayan 



Meeting DatesJune 10, 1947 


 




Background








The Union Constitution Committee and the Provincial Constitution Committee had previously decided, in a joint meeting held on 7 June 1947, that a Governor appointed by the Province and elected by a special electoral college would head each Province. On June 9, Sub-Committee I was appointed to discuss this matter and determine what special privileges should be granted to members of Provincial Legislatures.













Work Summary


Sub-Committee I, appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee, convened on 10 June 1947 for approximately one hour to discuss the composition of the electoral college responsible for electing the Governor. The committee determined that the electoral college members would be elected during general elections based on the ratio of one elector for every 10,000 adults, and their tenure would extend until the next general election. Any election disputes would be resolved by the Supreme Court.
Additionally, the committee granted members of Provincial Legislatures the same privileges as those afforded to members of Parliament, as specified in the official memorandum on the Union Constitution.
The Constituent Assembly endorsed the principle of an elected Governor when presented with the report of the Provincial Constitution Committee in July 1947. However, two years later, the decision was revised in favor of a Governor nominated by the Union government. Jawaharlal Nehru argued in the Constituent Assembly that this would prevent friction within Provincial Governments and reduce separatist tendencies.




Resources



The Framing of India’s Constitution 1966, Vol. 2 by Shiva Rao
The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation by Granville Austin




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















