






























Sir T. Madhava Rao’s 1874 Constitution for the Princely States: Is This India’s First Historical Constitution? - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Sir T. Madhava Rao’s 1874 Constitution for the Princely States: Is This India’s First Historical Constitution?


 
















Sir T. Madhava Rao’s 1874 Constitution for the Princely States: Is This India’s First Historical Constitution?



Blog



Editorial Team






19 September 2022

Share









 
									Image credit: Wikipedia (public domain)								

You may have noticed from our earlier desk briefs, blog posts and pretty much all the writing on ConstitutionofIndia.net, that we are obsessed with Historical Constitutions.
We are constantly engaging with documents written prior to 1946 that put forward a constitutional imagination for India. Our section on the Historical Constitutions presents carefully selected, edited and human tagged versions of these. Many of these documents remain tucked up in the dusty shelves of archives and libraries around the country, or even the world, waiting to be discovered.
Up till now, we have concurred with scholars such as Niraja Jayal in considering the Swaraj Bill of 1895 as the first Indian Historical Constitution1. It appears however, that there is a new contender.
Political scientist Rahul Sagar has argued that a 4-page draft written by Sir Raja Tanjore Madhava Rao as a ‘Charter or Constitution’ for the Princely States in 1874 – close to 10 years before the Swaraj Bill – should be considered to be the first Indian Constitutional document.
T Madhava Rao. Image Credit: Royal Collection Trust
As the Dewan of the Princely State of Travancore from 1857-72, Rao had made a name for himself as an administrator par excellence. This experience gave him a clear idea of the problems ailing the administration of the native Princely States, which were theoretically sovereign in internal affairs, but under the external suzerainty of the British Crown.
Rao envisages a constitutional monarchy for the Princely States, in which the Maharaja would act as per the recommendations of an appointed Dewan or Prime Minister. The British Resident as the governmental representative would be consulted by the Dewan on all important matters. Thus, the prescribed structure would essentially bring the States under full British control without the risks inherent in deposing the princes. The draft includes key liberal demands of the day: rule of law, freedom of speech and assembly, freedom of the press, religious tolerance, right to property and more.
In the coming few weeks, we will closely read this document, compare it with other Historical Constitutions and recover in detail the constitutional future it paints for India.
Jayal, N.G. (2013) Citizenship and its discontents: An Indian history. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. [↩]

Tags Historical ConstitutionPrincely States 














Comments







  Billie Strutton 



								6 May 2023							




Keep up the  wonderful work , I read few  content  on this  site and I think  that your blog  is very   interesting and  contains  sets  of  great  info  .

Reply 





  Sang Lokaphone 



								15 May 2023							




You have brought up a very  fantastic  points ,  thankyou  for the post.

Reply 









Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















