






























Article 289: Exemption of property and income of a State from Union taxation - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part XII

Article
289



Exemption of property and income of a State from Union taxation

(1) The property and income of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition of, any tax to such extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State, or any operations connected therewith, or any property used or occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any income accruing or arising in connection therewith.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or to any class of trade or business, which Parliament may by law declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government.



 
 

VERSION 1




Draft Article 266, Draft Constitution of India (1948)
Subject as hereinafter provided, the Government of a State shall not be liable to Union taxation in respect of lands or buildings situate within the territory of India, or income accruing, arising or received within such territory:
Provided that-
(a) Where a trade or business of any kind is carried on by or on behalf of the Government of a State, nothing in this article shall exempt that Government from any Union tax or the levy of a sum in lieu of such tax in respect of that trade or business or any operations connected therewith, or any income arising in connection therewith, or any property occupied for the purposes thereof;
(b) Nothing in this article shall exempt the Ruler of any State for the time being specified in Part III of the First Schedule from any Union tax in respect of lands, buildings or income being his personal property or personal income.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this article, any operations incidental to the ordinary functions of the Government of a State, such as, the sale of the forest produce of any forest under the control of the Government of a State or of any article produced in any jail within a State, shall not be deemed to be a trade or business carried on by or on behalf of the Government of the State.




VERSION 2


Article 289, Constitution of India 1950
(1) The property and income of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation.
⁠(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition of, any tax to such extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State, or any operations connected therewith, or any property used or occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any income accruing or arising in connection therewith.
⁠(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or to any class of trade or business, which Parliament may by law declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of government.




SUMMARY



Draft Article 266 (Article 289, Constitution of India 1950) was discussed in the Assembly on 9 September 1949. This Draft Article regulates taxation of a State Government by the Union. It did not permit the Union to tax State Governments on lands or buildings and income accruing within the State. However, it allowed the Union to tax State Governments on its trade or business. Further, it also allowed taxation of rulers of princely states on their personal property and income.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee proposed an amendment to replace the Draft Article and provide that the Union would not tax property and income of the State governments. However, Parliament by law could empower the Union to tax income from trade or business of the State governments excluding trade or business declared as incidental to ordinary functions of government by Parliament.
Many Members proposed amendments to curtail the power the Union to tax the State Governments. They suggested excluding (i) trade and business carried on within the State, (ii) trade and business carried on before the commencement of the Constitution and (iii) programmes of their development and expansion; the preparations for which are complete.
The Finance Minister reassured the Members that public utility undertakings would be outside the scope of taxation and there would not be any discrimination between the Union and the State in regard to the taxation of industrial undertakings. Based on these assurances, these amendments were subsequently withdrawn.
The Assembly adopted the Draft Article as amended by the Chairman of the Drafting Committee on 9 September 1949.



 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















