






























R. Sankar - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										R. Sankar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
R. Sankar
1909 - 1972




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Travancore-Cochin
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Malayalam
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Sankar was born in the village of Kuzhikkalidavaka in Kerala’s Kollam district on 30 April 1909 as the youngest of five brothers. He completed his schooling in 1924, initially at the Puthoor Primary School and later at the English School, Kottarakkara. After school, Sankar joined Maharaja’s College in Thiruvananthapuram. In 1933, he took up law at the University Law College in Thiruvananthapuram. Though trained as a lawyer, Sankar began his professional life as a teacher when he joined Sivagiri High School in Varkala as the principal.  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Beginning in the 1930s, the socio-political climate in Travancore was alive with progressive movements questioning caste hierarchies and pressing for a responsible government in the Princely State of Travancore. Agitations like the Nivarthana Movement of 1932 calling for proportionate representation for Ezhavas, Muslims and Christians in the State legislature would set the stage for Sankar’s rise in Kerala’s politics. A gifted orator, he quickly gained attention for his speeches focused on the prevalent social structure in Kerala and the discrimination experienced by marginalized castes.  
Soon, Sankar became involved with the Travancore State Congress which was formed in 1938. But his relationship with Congress had its ups and downs. His association with the Shree Narayana Dharma Paripalana Yogam (SNDP) also began during this period. Formed under the guidance of Shree Narayan Guru in 1908, SNDP was modeled as a social service organization geared to represent the Ezhava Community. Sankar would become General Secretary of SNDP in 1944 and continue to hold the post for another 10 years. He also served as the President of the Yogam.  
Contribution to Constitution Making
Sankar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Princely State of Cochin-Travancore on a Congress Party ticket. He did not actively speak in the Assembly.
Later Contributions
Sankar was initially a member of the Travancore Legislative Assembly in 1948 and after the State’s merger with the Kingdom of Cochin he took his seat in the Travancore-Cochin Assembly until 1956. 
By the late 1940s, Sankar’s relationship with the Congress had become tenuous. The Party was caught in an internal power struggle between religious pressure groups and was now primarily controlled by Christian denominations. The rift within the Congress reached its climax in 1949 when Sankar and the Nair Service Society’s Mannathu Padmanabhan were dropped from the Party. The two then formed the Hindu Maha Mandalam, forcing a brief respite in the otherwise fragile relationship between the Nairs and Ezhavas. Though this was spouted as a united Hindu Party, the experiment was short-lived. 
The newly formed Travancore-Cochin State went through a period of instability, which saw numerous ministries come and go. In 1956, the new state of Kerala was born and a Communist government came to power the following year. The educational and agrarian policies of the government invited a united resistance from opposition political parties and religious groups, particularly the Christian and Nair interest groups. Sankar as the President of the Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee, led the party’s powerful support to this movement called the ‘Liberation Struggle’ that would eventually dismiss the elected Communist government in 1959.  
In the next elections in 1960 the Congress under Sankar was able to form a coalition government with the Praja Socialist Party’s Pattom Thanu Pillai as the Chief Minister. Sankar as the face of Congress served as the deputy Chief minister with additional charge of finance in this ministry. In 1962, he became the first Congress Chief Minister of Kerala. But his term lasted only until 1964, as the Party’s internal turmoil forced him to resign. His loss in the following elections of 1965 pushed Sankar to take a step back from politics and shift focus to his work with SNDP.  
Sankar was a committed educationist and is still widely remembered for the umpteen educational institutions he helped establish. He founded the Shree Naryana Trusts (SN Trusts) in 1952 to start and manage SNDP’s educational institutions aimed at democratizing access to education in a deeply discriminatory Kerala society. The trust under Sankar opened numerous schools and colleges, including S.N. College Kollam, S.N College Chempazhanthy, Sree Narayana Guru College Of Advanced Studies Pambanar etc.  
Sankar passed away on 6 November 1972 aged 63. 


 



Key Speeches



Sankar was concerned that a chunk of the Travancore State’s income after independence would go to the Centre and hence, argued for some level of fiscal autonomy for the State to be able to maintain its high level of development and administrative efficiency. 
He requested the Assembly to stop the imposition of Hindi as the national language until the people from the South and East of India were able to sufficiently acquainted with it. In the meantime, he wanted English to continue as the primary means of communication. 



 



Resources



 Sankar by Sudha P. (National Book Stall, 1983)
Chief Ministers, Ministers and Leaders Of Opposition of Kerala: Biographical Sketches and Other Data (Secretariat of the Kerala Legislature, 2018) 
Groupisavum Cheriporum; Adhikara Rashtriyathil  Manamnonth R Sankar; Ormachithram (Manorama News, 2021) 
The Liberation Struggle and the Dismissal of the First Communist Ministry in Kerala by Dr. Ajayan Thakappan Nair (South Asia Journal, 2016) 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















