






























Begum Aizaz Rasul - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Begum Aizaz Rasul


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Begum Aizaz Rasul
1908 - 2001




Key Information

Party: All-India Muslim League
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Female
Mother Tongue: Urdu
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Born into a princely family on 4 April 1908 in Punjab, politics and public life was not new to Begum Aizaz Rasul. She was involved in politics at a very young age- she attended political conferences with her father and also served as his secretary.  
Rasul defied many traditional norms like the purdah system.  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Rasul stepped into electoral politics in 1937 when she was elected as a member of the U.P. Legislative Assembly. She continued to be a member of the U.P. Assembly until 1951. Rasul was among the very few women legislators to be elected from a non-reserved province in British India- a remarkable achievement. 
During her tenure as a member of the U.P. Assembly, she served in important posts like the Leader of the Opposition (1950-1952) and Deputy President of the Council (1937-1940). 
She was a strong opponent of reservation for minorities in legislative assemblies, the partition of India, and feudal practices like the Zamindari system.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Rasul was the only Muslim woman in the Constituent Assembly. She represented the United Provinces as a Muslim League member. In the Assembly, she intervened in the debates on national language, India remaining a part of the Commonwealth, reservation, property rights, and minority rights.
Later Contributions
Rasul had an active political career post-independence as well. Rasul was elected to the Rajya Sabha (1952-1956). She was subsequently elected to the legislative assembly of Uttar Pradesh (1969 -1989).
Her views on reservations seemed to have changed. When invited to a convention to discuss the need for a reservation for Muslims in legislatures and services, Rasul sent a message –“As communal feelings have grown and the concept of Hindutva has gained popularity, it is time now to think anew of how to improve the educational and socio-economic conditions of Muslims.”
Rasul was deeply involved in popularising Hockey for Indian women. For two decades, she served as the President of the Indian Women’s Hockey Federation. Later, she went on to head the Asian Women’s Hockey Federation.
She passed away in December 2001. 
Key Writings
Rasul penned her autobiography titled From Purdah to Parliament. She chronicles her journey as a Muslim woman in the Indian political and constitutional space.


 



Key Speeches



During the discussion on the Report of Advisory Committee on Minority Rights, Rasul spoke against separate electorates for minority communities. But at an earlier occasion, she had also clarified that the majority must fulfill its duty not to discriminate against minorities for joint electorates to work.
Responding to the demands of making ‘Sanskritised Hindi’ the National language, she pointed out that very few people understood the language. Instead, she argued for adopting Hindustani as the national language.
During the discussion on fundamental rights, she noted that the restrictions in the Draft Constitution, 1948 essentially negated the fundamental rights guaranteed. She stated, “I find that what has been given with one hand has been taken away by the other.” 
Rasul highlighted the need for ensuring ‘just compensation’ in another one of her interventions around the government’s power to acquire property.
She also made an important speech in the Assembly in favour of Nehru’s proposal for India to remain a part of the Commonwealth while also attaining the status of a Republic. 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















