






























Desk Brief: Why is the President of India Not Elected by the People? - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Why is the President of India Not Elected by the People?


 
















Desk Brief: Why is the President of India Not Elected by the People?



Blog



Editorial Team






22 June 2022

Share









 
									President Ram Nath Kovind. 
Image Credits: Wikimedia Commons								

As the tenure of President Ram Nath Kovind comes to an end, political parties are scrambling to decide who would be the 16th President of the Indian Republic. The BJP – led National Democratic Alliance has finalised Draupadi Murmu as its candidate, while Yashwant Sinha has been chosen as the joint opposition’s candidate. The Constitution of India mandates (Article 54) that the President must be elected through an electoral college comprising Members of Parliament and the State legislative assemblies. This is what is called an ‘indirect’ election. The people do not directly elect the President—our MPs and MLAs, who we have elected, choose the President.
Considering the NDA’s dominance at the Union and State legislatures, everyone expects that its choice will win. This has not deterred opposition parties like the Congress Party who are expected to advance their candidate as well. Political parties are buzzing with activity.
The centrality of political parties in the selection of the President is something that Constituent Assembly member K.T. Shah wanted to avoid. Speaking in the Constituent Assembly on Draft Article 43 (that became Article 54 of the Constitution of India), he argued that the indirect election of the President made them a ‘creature of party majorities in the centre or the local legislatures’. He proposed that the President be directly elected by every adult citizen of the country. For Shah, the President of India had to represent the ‘will’ of the people without a whiff of party politics.
K. Hanumanthaiah flipped Shah’s argument on its head. If avoiding party politics was the desired goal, then Shah’s proposal to hold direct elections would be a mistake. Direct elections would require a presidential candidate to campaign across the country, which was only possible with some affiliation with a political party.
B.R. Ambedkar spoke last in the debate and rejected Shah’s proposal. He insisted that directly electing the President of India was not desirable for two reasons: First, it was not practical—the administrative machinery in the country did not have the resources to conduct direct elections for India’s large electorate. Second, the President of India was merely a figurehead of the Executive and possessed no real executive or administrative powers. Therefore, direct elections were not necessary.
The Assembly seemed convinced by Ambedkar’s arguments and rejected Shah’s proposal. They decided that the President of India would not be directly elected by the people.

Tags Article 54Election of the President 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















