






























K. M. Munshi - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										K. M. Munshi


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
K. M. Munshi
1887 - 1971




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Gujarati
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Committee on the Rules of ProcedureAdvisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas+2 moreSub-Committee on Fundamental RightsSub-Committee on Minorities 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
K.M. Munshi was born on 30th December, 1887 in Bharuch in Gujarat. He completed his schooling in Khan Bahadur Dalal School, after which he pursued his college education in Baroda College. He was particularly drawn by the views of Sri Aurobindo Ghosh who was his teacher in the Baroda College. In the year 1907, he moved to Bombay to practice law and to complete his L.L.B and B.A examinations. Along with his legal practise he also started writing histrorical fiction and had many novels under his name.
After completing his studies, Munshi dove into social reform and activism, especially in the areas of women’s rights and caste prejudice. He went on to join the Indian National Congress in 1916, after which he became a member of the subjects committee and also functioned as the secretary of the Bombay Presidency Association.
Munshi also founded the Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan in the year 1938 with an aim to preserve Indian culture, education and art from a secular perspective.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Munshi was an active participant in the freedom struggle. He extended legal counsel to a number of freedom fighters who were detained by the British, and also participated in the Bardoli Satyagraha, Salt Satyagraha and the Quit India movement.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Munshi was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bombay on a Congress Party ticket. He was one of the most active members of the Assembly, being a member of 16 committees and sub-committees including the Drafting Committee. Some of his interventions were in the debates relating the fundamental rights, citizenship, and minority rights.
Later Contributions:
After Independence he served as the Minister for Agriculture and Food till the year 1953. During his tenure as an agriculture minister he conceptualized the Van Mahotsav initiative to increase the forest cover in the country. He served as the Governor of Uttar Pradesh from 1953 to 1957.
In 1954 he started a monthly journal called ‘Bhargava’ in Gujarati and also started the journal of Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan that is run to this day.
Munshi died on 8 February 1971 at the age of 83 in Bombay, India.
Key Writings:
K.M Munshi was a prolific writer and had written many pieces mostly revolving around the Indian independence movement, Gandhian ideology, Indian culture, and mythology. These included texts such as Pilgrimage to Freedom : Indian Constitutional documents, Bhagavad Gita and Modern Life, I follow Mahatma Gandhi, The ruin that Britain Wrought, Jay Somnath, Prithvivallabh, Maari Kamala, Patan ni Prabhuta, Gujarat no Nath, Rajadhiraj and Akhand Hindustan.


 



Key Speeches



Munshi actively expressed his views in favour of adopting a democratic basis for citizenship laws.
He also expressed his views regarding the amendments moved by various members on educational rights of minorities, and the educational policy of such institutions.
He supported an amendment that ensured the independence of the Election Commission, while at the same time acknowledging the fact that it “must remain to a large extent an ally of the Government”, and cannot be allowed to assume the status of a “Super-Government.”
He argued in the favour of extending the power to issue writs to all the High courts in India.



 



Resources



Builders of Modern India: K.M Munshi
Life and Works of K.M Munshi
The Constitution of India: The Role of K.M Munshi



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















