






























About Us - Constitution of India
























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 





About Us
Building a robust constitutional culture in India through a shared understanding of constitutional origins


ConstitutionofIndia.net is the flagship initiative by the Constitutional Culture team at the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bangalore. The team aims to contribute to the realization of radical transformative goals of the Constitution of India, 1950 in the 21st century by creating a new Indian citizen who is critically aware of Indian constitutional history and its impact in shaping our everyday lives
 
 
 








WHAT WE DO
We create digital public goods and build civic education initiatives.


							 ConstitutionofIndia.net is an open access digital platform that provides insights into India's constitutional and political history through its rich archive of historical and contemporary primary materials.  We extend these digital materials through curated public engagement activities that include workshops, seminars, quizzes, conferences, theatre productions and much more! ConstitutionofIndia.net is routinely accessed by schools, universities, civil society organizations, lawyers, academics, and the general public. It is widely cited in numerous popular and academic books, journals, and news media. In late 2022, the Supreme Court of India referenced ConstitutionofIndia.net's historical archives in its landmark EWS case.						





 

READ

Browse digitized, edited, and easily searchable versions of critical primary materials on the Indian Constitution, including 22 historical constitutions, 10 Constituent Assembly committee reports, 167 days of Constituent Assembly deliberations, and the Constitution of India 1950. These documents are carefully organized to enable quick access and are contextualized with introductions and summaries written by the ConstitutionofIndia.net team.





 

EXPLORE

Explore the individuals, institutions, and processes involved in the drafting of India’s Constitution. This section includes biographies of constitution framers, the work of institutions, and an overview of the various stages of India’s constitution making process. It highlights the connections between these strands of constitution-making and links them to our primary materials database.





 

ENGAGE

Our blog, podcasts, and videos offer valuable insights into the history of India’s Constitution highlighting its relevance to contemporary India and the world. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.





 

SEARCH

Trace the evolution of constitutional and political ideas from the late 19th century to 1950 through a powerful and intuitive search engine. Results may be filtered by document type, constitutional provision and foreign constitutional reference.





 

LEARN

Explore our collection of educational materials we have used in our workshops, seminars, and classrooms across the country to teach a wide range of constitutional topics. These resources are useful for both students at the school and university levels who want to learn independently and for educators who can use them in their classrooms.









THE TEAM
We are committed to facilitate the emergence of a vibrant constitutional culture


The Constitutionofindia.net team brings together individuals from diverse academic backgrounds including the law, social sciences and humanities who are dedicated to developing a vibrant constitutional culture in India. They write, research, build digital resources and organise public education events.









 

Dr. Sudhir Krishnaswamy

Chief Editor
sudhir.krishnaswamy@clpr.org.in


Sudhir is a co-founder and trustee of CLPR. He is currently the Vice-Chancellor of National Law School of India University(NLSIU), Bengaluru. Previously he was a professor at the Azim Premji University. He was also the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Visiting Professor of Indian Constitutional Law at Columbia Law School. He graduated from the National Law School of India University (NLSIU), Bangalore (B.A. LL.B). He read the BCL and obtained a D.Phil. from Oxford University. He has been a Teaching Fellow in Law at the Pembroke College at Oxford University, an Assistant Professor at NLSIU and a Professor at the West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata.
In the past, Sudhir has also worked in the Prime Minister’s Committee on Infrastructure and the Kasturirangan Committee on Governance of Bangalore. He has authored a book titled ‘Democracy and Constitutionalism in India’ which was published by the Oxford University Press in 2009. His main areas of interest are constitutional law, legal education, legal theory, intellectual property law and administrative law.





 

Vineeth Krishna

Senior Research Associate 
vineeth.krishna@clpr.org.in


Vineeth graduated with a B.A. from St. Joseph’s College of Arts and Science, Bangalore. He completed his MA in Development (Law and Governance) at the Azim Premji University, Bangalore. Vineeth is interested in studying Indian constitutionalism through the lens of political theory and intellectual history.









PARTNERSHIPS & COLLABORATIONS
We work with individuals and institutions who share our goals of building a strong constitutional culture in India.


Over the years, we have worked with a range of institutions comprising government agencies, schools, universities, civil society organisations, publishing houses and diplomatic institutions. We collaborate with and support these institutions to organise workshops and seminars, develop educational materials, and conduct cutting edge academic research on Indian constitutional law and history.
For instance, Constitutionofindia.net is a project partner for the Pluralist Agreement and Constitutional Transformation (PACT) project. PACT is an international collaboration with involving with SOAS University of London, York University, University of Oxford and the National Law School of India University.
We are always looking to work with individuals and institutions who share our goals of building a strong constitutional culture in India. If you would like to partner with us or explore ideas and projects please reach out to us at constitutiononindia.net@clpr.org.in






 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 











Support


The majority of our website and public education work is supported by the Friedrich Naumann Foundation, along with contributions from government agencies, educational institutions, philanthropists and not-for-profit organizations.


Support ConstitutionofIndia.net
Donate to us








Contact


Centre for Law & Policy Research
D6, Dona Cynthia Apartments,
35, Primrose Road, Ashok Nagar,
Bengaluru – 560025
Ph: +91 080 4091 2112

Reach out to us at:
constitutionofindia@clpr.org.in
 















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















