






























This Month in Constitution Making (July 1947): Constituent Assembly Reacts to India's Partition - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										This Month in Constitution Making (July 1947): Constituent Assembly Reacts to India’s Partition


 
















This Month in Constitution Making (July 1947): Constituent Assembly Reacts to India’s Partition



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






11 July 2022

Share









 
									Image credit: Wikimedia Commons								

On 14 July 1947, two months since it last met, the Constituent Assembly of India sat down for business, knowing that India would be partitioned. After months and years of political jostling over India’s constitutional future, in May 1947 the British made it clear: partition would happen.
Predictably, deliberations of the Assembly on 14 July saw members referring to political developments in their speeches and what it meant for the Indian constitution-making project. There were three significant strands to these discussions.
First, some members representing the Muslim League and the Princely States, who until now had boycotted the Assembly, finally chose to join the Assembly’s proceedings and began to trickle in. The very first item on the Assembly’s agenda was the signing of the register by these new members. After the President called out the name of the first new member who happened to be from the Muslim League, Deshbandhu Gupta intervened with a point of order: he wanted the new member to first clarify if he ‘still subscribes to the two-nation theory’? Gupta suggested that in light of India’s partition, only those members who subscribed to the Objectives Resolution should be allowed to sign the register and formally join the Assembly.
The President of the Assembly disagreed. As long as a member was duly elected to the Assembly, the President reasoned, the member had every right to join the proceedings. There were other Assembly members however who welcomed members of the Muslim League with open arms.
Second, knowing that partition was on the horizon, some members suggested that certain aspects of the constitutional scheme as reflected in the Objectives Resolution should be reconsidered. K.M. Munshi felt that, in light of partition, ‘…the programme of this Constituent Assembly should be reoriented in the new atmosphere to meet the new situation that has arisen’. He felt that the loose-centre type federal structure that the Assembly was working with, including the federal arrangements like ‘groups’ and ‘sections’, should be dropped; these were meant to placate the Muslim League and keep the doors of the Assembly open to them. Now that Pakistan was going to be a reality, Munshi felt that these federal arrangements should be discarded and India should now have a strong centre.
R.V. Dhulekar suggested another substantive change to the principles embodied in the Objectives Resolution. He seemed to argue that partition justified reconsideration of principles that promised to protect ‘culture, language and civilization’ for all people residing in India. Dhulekar here was implicitly referring to the rights of minorities.
Lastly, there was a sense of urgency in the Assembly on July 14th. The British government, in addition to making it clear that partition would take place also set the date of India’s independence – 15 August 1947. The President of the Assembly argued that after the passing of the Independence Bill, the Constituent Assembly would also become a Legislative Assembly and these legislative functions had to be given adequate attention. So, he hoped that the Constitution would be passed in October of 1947; this would allow the Assembly to focus on and execute its legislative functions. Munshi too argued that a lot of procedures related to Assembly’s work and its decision making had to be simplified and expedited and that the Constitution should be passed as soon as possible.

Tags Partition 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















