






























This Month in Constitution-Making (September 1949): Constituent Assembly Settles on a Name for the Union - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										This Month in Constitution-Making (September 1949): Constituent Assembly Settles on a Name for the Union


 
















This Month in Constitution-Making (September 1949): Constituent Assembly Settles on a Name for the Union



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






20 September 2021

Share









 
									The 1948 Draft Constitution made available for purchase. Image Credits: The People and the Making of India's Constitution (Ornit Shani, 2022)								

The Draft Constitution of India 1948 opened with Article 1 that stated ‘India shall be a Union of States’. When Article 1 was taken up for discussion in the Constituent Assembly, some members gave notice of amendments that proposed alternatives to ‘India‘ which included ‘Bharat’, ‘Bharat Varsha’, and ‘Hindustan’. Drafting Committee member Ananthasayanam Ayyangar requested the Assembly to take up these amendments later.
The Assembly returned to the matter a year later, on 17 September 1949, to debate and finally settle the name of the Union. Ambedkar, on behalf of the Drafting Committee, moved an amendment proposing to change Article 1 of the Draft Constitution to ‘India, that is, Bharat shall be a Union of States.’
It appears that the Drafting Committee took onboard demands to include ‘Bharat’ in the clause. Interestingly, the Committee retained ‘India’.
Some members welcomed the inclusion of ‘Bharat’. Seth Govind Das described it as a moment of ‘great pleasure’. Ram Sahai argued that ‘there cannot be a greater elation for us that the country…is being named Bharat’, and Kamalapathi Tripathi was ‘enamored by the historic name of Bharat‘. These members explained the historical significance of ‘Bharat’ – a term they claimed could be traced back to, and used in, ancient Indian texts like the Vedas, Upanishads, and the Mahabharata.
However, these members found the overall phrase – ‘India, that is, Bharat’ – undesirable. Seth Govind Das said: ‘I am glad to find that we are giving the most ancient name to our country but, Dr. Ambedkar will excuse me, we are not giving it in as beautiful a way as it was necessary. “India, that is, Bharat” are not beautiful words for, the name of a country.’ H.V. Kamath too found the phrase inelegant. Inspired by a provision of the Irish Constitution (‘The name of the State is Eire, or, in the English language, Ireland.‘) – Kamath proposed to replace Clause 1 with ‘Bharat or, in the English language, India, shall be a Union of States.‘ Significantly, unlike Ambedkar’s phrasing, Kamath put ‘Bharat’ before ‘India’ – presumably to give more emphasis to ‘Bharat’.
At the end of the debate, Assembly members rejected Kamath’s amendment and accepted Ambedkar’s. And the Constitution of India 1950 opened with ‘India, that is Bharat, is a Union of States’.

Tags Draft Constitution of India 1948Article 1 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















