






























Article 48: Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part IV

Article
48



Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry

The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.



 
 

Version 1




Article 48, Constitution of India 1950
The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.




Summary


Draft Article 38-A (Article 48) was not part of the Draft Constitution 1948 – an Assembly member introduced it on 24 November 1948. It directed the State to develop the agricultural and animal husbandry sectors of the economy and to ensure that certain types of cattle were not slaughtered.
The Assembly was polarised on religious lines: most Hindu members supported the provision and most Muslim members were reluctant.
Two types of arguments were mobilised to support the Draft Article: religious and economic. Members stated that the cow, and cattle in general, held a special status in Hindu religion and culture. The slaughter of these animals was akin to attacking the Hindu religion. But they also argued that cattle played a key role in the Indian economy as it was the source of valuable goods like manure and milk.
The Draft Article directed the prohibition of the slaughter of ‘useful’ cattle. Some members argued that even non-useful cattle should be protected and rejected the distinction.
Muslim members were suspicious of the economic rationales that were put forward in support of the Draft Article; they accused members of hiding the true rationale which was to protect Hindu religious sentiment.
Further, one Muslim member pointed out there was a large population of dead-weight cattle that was a drain on the economy. He implied that the economically reasonable thing to do with these cattle would be to slaughter them.
At the end of the debate, the Draft Article was adopted by the Assembly. Many members of the Assembly had previously wanted a cow slaughter type article to be included in the legally enforceable fundamental rights section. The Assembly’s decision to adopt the Article but place it in the legally unenforceable Directive Principles seems to have been a compromise.
The Draft Article came up for discussion again, a year later on 14 November 1949. A member said the Article in the revised constitution was different from what was adopted by the Assembly on 24 November 1948.
The member, moving an amendment, accused the Drafting Committee of changing and watering down the Article without the sanction of the Assembly. After another brief round of debate and discussion, the Assembly accepted the amendment and settled on a final version that is part of the Constitution of India 1950.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















