






























B.G. Kher - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										B.G. Kher


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
B.G. Kher
1888 - 1957




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Provincial Constitution CommitteeSub-Committee I (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee)+1 moreSub-Committee II (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee) 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Balasaheb Gangadhar Kher was born on 24 August 1888 in Ratnagiri, in present day Maharashtra. Born into a middle-class family, Kher spent his childhood in a small town – Kundgol. He studied at the New English School in Pune through the guidance from his mentor, Gopal Krishna Gokhale.
Kher had a stellar academic record. He pursued a Bachelor of Arts course at the Wilson College Bombay (1908) and was awarded a high distinction. Kher also received the Bau Daji Lad award for his outstanding performance in Sanskrit. After completing his B.A. degree, he enrolled as a ‘vakil’ and then qualified as a solicitor (1918).
Kher established a law firm, Manilal Kher & Co. (1918) and also started the internationally reputed Bombay Law Journal (1923). He continued his legal practice even when he was actively involved in the Indian freedom movement.
Kher wanted to improve education in Maharashtra. He regulated and standardised the law program at the Government Law College, Mumbai. He chaired the Wardha Education Committee of the Central Advisory Board of Education (1929). This Committee made recommendations on to reform education in India – particularly, increasing expenditure on education.
Role in India’s Independence movement
Inspired by Tilak and Gandhi, Kher joined the Indian freedom movement. He participated in the Non-Cooperation Movement (1920). He was arrested for his involvement in the Salt Satyagraha (1930) and Quit India Movement (1942).
Kher emerged as a Congress stalwart in Maharashtra. He was appointed as the Secretary of the Bombay branch of the Swaraj Party and then held important positions in the Congress Party like – President of Bombay Provincial Congress Committee and President Harijan Sevak Sangh Maharashtra.
He took part in social reform movements as well. Kher founded the Bombay Legal Aid Society and Adivasi Seva Sangh – an organisation that worked on economic and educational empowerment of adivasis. He served as the Vice-President of the Bombay Rescue Home for Women.
Kher participated in Congress’s first electoral campaign in Bombay. He was elected as a member in the Bombay Assembly and then went on to become the Chief Minister in 1937. He repeated this achievement in the 1946 elections. He was the Chief Minister of Bombay till the 1952 General Elections. During his second term as Chief Minister, he helped establish the Poona University (now known as the Savitribai Phule Pune University) in 1949. A building on the University Campus was named Kher Bhavan to commemorate his work on promoting education,
Contribution to Constitution Making
Kher was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bombay on a Congress Party ticket (1946). He contributed to discussions on prohibition of intoxicating drinks and drugs, appointment of Governors and right to equality.
Later Contributions
Kher took up the role of a diplomat – he served as the Higher Commissioner to the United Kingdom (1952-54). After this stint, he was appointed as the Chairman of the Official Languages Commission (1956) constituted to examine the use of Hindi and English by the government for official purposes.
He was awarded the Padma Vibhushan in 1954 for his services to the country.
Kher passed away on 8 March 1957. He was remembered by his peers as a ‘great patriot and administrator’, ‘a man of the highest integrity’. A postal stamp was issued to honour him in 1989.


 



Key Speeches



Kher supported the inclusion of the Directive Principle that sought to prohibit intoxicating drinks and drugs. He was concerned about the economic loss resulting from increase in crime, disease and loss of efficiency due to consumption of these drinks and drugs. He believed that the revenue earned by the State from permitting sale of intoxicating drinks would not compensate for such loss.
He rejected the proposal to have an elected Governor. He stated that an executive official should not be elected by popular vote as it would hamper smooth governance.
While defending the Draft Constitution, Kher highlighted that the fundamental rights, particularly, the abolishment of untouchability helped ensure social, political and economic equality for Dalits, Adivasis and members of other backward classes.



 



Resources



M. V. Kamath, ‘B.G. Kher, the Gentleman Premier’, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, (1989)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















