






























Mukut Bihari Lal Bhargava - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Mukut Bihari Lal Bhargava


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Mukut Bihari Lal Bhargava
1903 - 1980




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Ajmer-Merwera
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: The Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early life
Mukat Behari Lal Bhargava was born on 30 January 1903 in Rajasthan. He studied at Maharaja Middle High School, Shahpura and Mission High School, Beawar. He went on to complete his Masters degree in history at Muir Central College, Allahabad. After this, he pursued law at Allahabad University.
He began a law practice in at Bewar in 1927 and at the same time served as a member of the Bewar Municipality. He became the President of the Bar Association in Beawar and later was appointed as a Senior Advocate of the Supreme Court. He also served as the Chairman of the Rajasthan Bar Council.
Bhargava enjoyed swimming, reading and music. He was well-traveled and visited many countries like Switzerland, Austria, Germany, U.K., Paris, Italy as a representative of India at various international meetings.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Bhargava joined the Indian National Congress in 1930 and participated in various movements. He was imprisoned for an individual ‘Satyagraha’ (1941) and again during the Quit India Movement (1942).
He was involved in many social movements including labour, farmer and harijan movements. He was a member of the Ajmer Provincial Harijan Sevak Samaj and the Ajmer Rajya Khadi and Village Industries Board. Bhargava also worked on women’s education and served as the Vice-President of the Mahila Siksha Sadan.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Bhargava was a representative of Ajmer in the Constituent Assembly. He participated in the discussions on the status of Chief Commissioner’s provinces (now known as Union Territories) in the Assembly.
Contributions Post-Independence
Bhargava continued to play an active political and administrative role post independence. He worked extensively for Ajmer as a member of the Chief Commissioner’s Advisory Council for Ajmer Merwara (1947—50). He was elected to the First (1952-57), Second (1957-1962) and Third Lok Sabha (1962-1967) from Ajmer on a Congress party ticket.
He represented India at various international fora including the 41st Inter-Parliamentary Conference at Berne (1952), the Second Session of the World Government Conference at London (1952) and the World Moral Rearmament Assembly at Caux (1952).
He passed away on 18 December 1980. The Government of India issued a stamp in his name to commemorate his exceptional work in 2003.


 



Key Speeches


When the Draft Constitution was presented before the Assembly, he raised objections to the provisions on the Chief Commissioner’s provinces and was dismissive of retaining the administrative structure as enshrined in the Government of India Act, 1935.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















