






























U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 2 at NUALS, Kochi (Session I and II) - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 2 at NUALS, Kochi (Session I and II)


 

















 





Video




 




U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 2 at NUALS, Kochi (Session I and II)

October 30, 2021






The Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR) in collaboration with its partnered Indian and American universities organised a series of workshops on U.S.- India Comparative Constitutional law in October, November 2021 and January 2022. The partnered Indian and American law universities were paired for an interactive session.
On 30 and 31 October 2021, CLPR conducted the second virtual workshop of this series with students from the National University for Advanced Legal Studies, Kochi (NUALS). It comprised of 4 sessions. This video covers session I and II. The U.S. law university partner for this workshop was Seattle University School of Law, Seattle. The workshop was attended by over 30 students from the two universities. 10 others were also in attendance—including faculty members, U.S. Consulate staff, and the CLPR team. The workshop was anchored around freedom of speech—particularly, hate speech. A list of reading materials was shared with the workshop participants in advance to facilitate an informed discussion.
The Agendas for session I and II are provided below:
9:30 am – 11:30 am – Session I: Constitutional Founding
Part I
CLPR resource persons reviewed important strands of the U.S. and Indian constitution-making projects and posed a provocative question to the participating students: ‘were the American and Indian constitution-making processes democratic?’.
The student discussion that followed, steered by CLPR, invoked different aspects of the two countries’ constitution-making processes. While doing so, students were able to better appreciate concepts like constitutionalism and democratic legitimacy—as well as their relevance in making sense of the constitutional founding of the U.S. and India.
Session Readings:

Making of the U.S. Constitution compiled by CLPR
Constitution Making in India: A Primer by Sudhir Krishnaswamy and Vineeth Krishna
Excerpts from The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of A Nation by Granville Austin (Oxford India Paperbacks, 1999)
Excerpts from The Federalist by Jack N. Rakove (Palgrave Macmillan, 2003)
The Making of India’s Constitution, YouTube, CLPR Trust

Presentation Slides: Session I Part I
Part II
CLPR resource persons introduced the Federalist Papers and the Constituent Assembly Debates to the students. The session focused on how the framers of U.S. and Indian Constitutions engaged with the separation of powers through a simulation exercise.
Students were divided into groups, each adopting the persona of a U.S. and Indian Constitution framer. They were asked to engage with a hypothetical situation that involved the separation of powers. This exercise reinforced the importance of primary constitutional history materials and their relevance in contemporary debates.
Session readings:

Excerpts from Indian Constituent Assembly Debates on Separation of Powers
Federalist Paper 51 on Separation of Powers
Balaji Raghavan v. Union of India (1996)

Presentation slides: Session I Part II
Speaker Remarks
Professor Arun Thiruvengadam, Professor of Law, National Law School of India University, was the invited speaker for this session. He tied together the preceding student discussions with the broader question of constitutional interpretation. His remarks were anchored around an important Supreme Court case—Balaji Raghavan v Union of India (1996). This was followed by a student question and answer session.
***
11.45 am – 1:45 pm – Session II: Freedom of Speech in India and U.S.
Part I
CLPR resource persons introduced students to the constitutional and legal architecture surrounding the freedom of speech in the U.S. and India. Students identified the similarities and differences in how the two jurisdictions treated freedom of speech.
Session readings:

Article 19(1)(a) and 19(2) of the Constitution of India, 1950 and First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States
Excerpts from Constituent Assembly Debates on Article 19 and comparisons to the US Constitution
Common Interpretation: Freedom of Speech and the Press by Geoffrey R. Stone and Eugene Volokh (National Constitution Centre)

Presentation slides: Session II Part I
Part II
CLPR presented students with the overview of how the U.S. and Indian Supreme Courts have adjudicated on freedom of speech cases—particularly those involving obscenity.
A student activity followed where students were presented with an excerpt from the story Lihaaf by Indian writer Ismat Chugtai. They were asked to determine how U.S. and Indian Courts would decide if the excerpt violated freedom of speech. This activity gave students a deeper insight into constitutional debates surrounding freedom of speech in the U.S and India.
Session readings:

Grove Press v. Gerstein, 378 U.S. 577 (1964)
Perumal Murugan v. Tamil Nadu W.P. Nos. 1215 and 20375 of 2015 (Mad HC 2017)

Presentation slides: Session II Part II
Speaker Remarks
This session was followed by remarks from Professor Sitharamam Kakarala, Director, School of Policy and Governance, Azim Premji University, Bengaluru. Professor Kakarala argued that comparative Constitutional Law must be based on a sound understanding of the history of modern law. Comparative law must be analysed in the context of time and place. Students found Professor Sitharamam’s remarks valuable in comparing the U.S. and India’s constitutional law and history.

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















