






























Mirza Mohammad Afzal Beg - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Mirza Mohammad Afzal Beg


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Mirza Mohammad Afzal Beg
1908 - 1982




Key Information

Party: National Conference
Constituency: Jammu and Kashmir
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Urdu
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Mirza Mohammed Afzal Beg was born in the Kashmir Valley’s Sarnel village (District Anantnag) in February 1908. He completed his schooling from C.M.S High School, Anantnag and graduated from Sri Pratap College, Srinagar. He then left Kashmir to pursue law at Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) — he belonged to the early crop of Kashmiri Muslims who gained access to higher education.  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
By 1932, he had returned to Kashmir and was joined by other young Kashmiri graduates like Sheikh Abdullah and G.M. Sadiq to protest the anti-democratic rule of the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir and demand self-government for Kashmiris. He formally joined Abdullah’s Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Conference (‘Conference’) and rose through the ranks to become its General Secretary. Beg and Abdullah would go on to enjoy a close political and personal relationship.  
In 1934, in the face of increasing protests, the Maharaja agreed to set up a Kashmir Legislative Assembly. Beg was elected to this Assembly. Meanwhile, the Conference was beginning to undergo something of an identity crisis that culminated in the setting up of a new political party – the National Conference. This new Party aimed to shift its focus from matters of Islamic religious belief to social and political issues. 
In the early 1940s, there was some collaboration between the Maharaja and the National Conference in Kashmir’s governance. Beg was appointed to a Royal Commission that made recommendations to the Maharaja on Kashmir’s political future. A key recommendation was dyarchy — political power should be shared between the Maharaja and the Legislative Assembly.  
In what appeared to be a dyarchy inspired appointment, the Maharaja brought two Assembly members into his Cabinet. Beg was one of them. From 1944 to 1946, he served as a Minister for Public Works and Municipalities.  
In 1946, Beg resigned from the Cabinet as he felt that the Maharaja’s attempts at implementing dyarchy was a farce. This created a huge uproar in Kashmir and marked the beginning of fierce conflict with the Maharaja. The Maharaja imprisoned Beg for participating in the 1946 Quit Kashmir Movement aimed at shunting out Kashmir’s royal family for good.  
Contribution to Constitution Making
Beg was one of four members elected to the Constituent Assembly from Jammu and Kashmir. He was not an active member of the Assembly. He was also part of the Jammu and Kashmir Constituent Assembly that drafted the Constitution between 1951 and 1956. 
Later Contributions
In 1947, the Maharaja acceded to the Indian dominion. An emergency administration, led by Abdullah, was installed. In 1948, Beg was appointed as the cabinet minister for Revenue, Food and Rehabilitation. During his tenure, Beg initiated and oversaw large scale land reforms in Jammu and Kashmir bringing an end to the feudal system. 
The years between 1951 and 1956 were politically charged for Beg. He was a member of the Jammu and Kashmir Constituent Assembly that drafted the State’s Constitution.  However, this second innings as a constitution framer was intermittent. In 1953, a coup mounted by a group of National Conference members lead by Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad, displaced Sheikh Abdullah as the Prime Minister of Jammu and Kashmir. In the years that followed, Beg and other National Conference members were repeatedly arrested by the new government. He was released from prison for good in 1956, and along with Sheikh Abdullah, formed a new political party called Plebiscite Front.  
In 1975, Abdullah and the Indira Gandhi government were in negotiations over the question of Kashmir’s autonomy. These negotiations in which Beg played a key role resulted in the 1975 Indira-Sheikh Accord that returned Abdullah as the State’s Chief Minister.  
In 1978, while serving as the Deputy Chief Minister in Abdullah’s cabinet, Abdullah asked Beg to resign alleging that Beg was responsible for defections in the Party. 
After a prolonged illness, Beg passed away on 11 June 1982.  
Key Writings
Some of Beg’s writings include, The Farce of Dyarchy and On the Way to Golden Harvests: Agricultural Reforms in Kashmir (1951). 
 


 



Resources



Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India) 
Personalities: A Comprehensive and Authentic Biographical Dictionary of Men who Matter in India (Arunam and Sheel, 1950) 
Remembering Mirza Afzal Beg (Greater Kashmir, 2015) 
Tribute: Mirza Afzal Beg by Mohammad Sayeed Malik (Kashmir Times, 2013) 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















