






























Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 







Home
								 ≫ 
												Committees
								 ≫ 
										Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas


 






Constitution Making 
Committees

Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas




















This committee was set up to look into framing a separate chapter of fundamental rights for Indian citizens as well as the specific rights of minorities, tribal and excluded areas.


 





Members




 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 







 





										Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar (Chairperson), 										
										B. R. Ambedkar, 										
										Govind Ballabh Pant, 										
										K. M. Munshi, 										
										K. T. Shah, 										
										Hansa Jivraj Mehta, 										
										Purushottam Das Tandon, 										
										Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, 										
										Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, 										
										Jaipal Singh, 										
										Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, 										
										B. Pocker Sahib Bahadur, 										
										B. Shiva Rao, 										
										Bakshi Tek Chand, 										
										Dakshayani Velayudhan, 										
										H. C. Mookherjee, 										
										Hasrat Mohani, 										
										Jagjivan Ram, 										
										Jairamdas Daulatram, 										
										Jawaharlal Nehru, 										
										M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, 										
										M. R. Masani, 										
										Mahavir Tyagi, 										
										Sucheta Kripalani, 										
										Syama Prasad Mookerjee, 										
										V.I. Muniswamy Pillai, 										
										Stanley Henry Prater, 										
										J. J. M. Nichols-Roy, 										
										R. K. Sidhwa, 										
										Ujjal Singh, 										
										Shankarrao Deo, 										
										Baldev Singh, 										
										Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan, 										
, 										
										P. R. Thakur 



Meeting DatesFebruary 27, 1947April 21, 1947April 22, 1947July 28, 1947 


 




Background


The Cabinet Mission Statement of 16 May 1946, laid down that a preliminary meeting of the Constituent Assembly should be established to determine the fundamental rights of citizens and minorities. Subsequently, the Objectives Resolution adopted by the Constituent Assembly on 22 January 1947, envisioned a Constitution for India that guaranteed justice, equality, and freedom to all people and provided adequate safeguards for minorities and backward classes.
The first task of the Assembly after adopting the Objectives Resolution was to form an Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities, and Other Related Subjects. On 24 January 1947, the Assembly passed a resolution, initiated by Govind Ballabh Pant, to establish the Committee. Initially, the Committee was to consist of only 50 members, but the President was authorized to nominate an additional 22 members to the Committee.




Work Summary


The Committee convened on April 21 and 22 for a two-day meeting to review the recommendations proposed by the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights and the interim report provided by the Minorities Sub-Committee. Prior to the meeting, Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar informed the Chairman of his intention to propose amendments to the clauses recommended by the Fundamental Rights Sub-Committee. Additionally, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur expressed opposition to certain changes made by the Minorities Sub-Committee in the recommendations of the Fundamental Rights Sub-Committee.
On 28 July 1947, the report of the Minorities Sub-Committee was presented to the Advisory Committee, and a discussion ensued for four days. The Committee largely endorsed the conclusions reached by the sub-committee, with the exception of appointing a sub-committee to investigate the status of Anglo-Indians in specific services and their access to existing educational facilities.




Key Documents



Report of the Advisory Committee on the Subject of Fundamental Rights
Report of the Advisory Committee on the Subject of Minority Rights on 8 August 1947
Note by Alladi Krishanswwamy on free speech submitted to the Committee on 31 April 1947





Resources



The Framing of India’s Constitution 1966, Vol. 2 by Shiva Rao
Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation by Granville Austin




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















