






























Article 330: Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part XVI

Article
330



Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People

(1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for —
(a) the Scheduled Castes;
(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam; and
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State or Union territory for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats allotted to that State or Union territory in the House of the People as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or Union territory or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or Union territory or part of the State or Union territory, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State or Union territory.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (2), the number of seats reserved in the House of the People for the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam shall bear to the total number of seats allotted to that State a proportion not less than the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the said autonomous districts bears to the total population of the State.
Explanation.—In this article and in article 332, the expression “population” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 2001 census.
 



 
 

VERSION 1




Article 292, Draft Constitution of India 1948 
Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for-
(a) The Muslim community and the Scheduled Castes;
(b) The scheduled tribes in every State for the time being specified in Part I of the first Schedule; and
(c) The Indian Christian community in the States of Madras and Bombay, according to the scale prescribed in sub-clause (b) of clause (5) of article 67 of this Constitution.




VERSION 2


Article 330, Constitution of India 1950
(1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for—
(a) the Scheduled Castes;
(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of Assam; and
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam.
⁠(2) The number of seats reserved in any State for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats allotted to that State in the House of the People as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State.




SUMMARY


Draft Article 292 (Article 330 of Constitution of India 1950) was discussed in the Constituent Assembly on 23 August 1949 and 24 August 1949. It granted reservation of seats for Muslims, Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes (ST) (from British provinces) and Indian Christians (from Madras and Bombay) in the Lok Sabha.  
The Drafting Committee Chairman proposed to replace this Draft Article to only provide reservation of seats for SCs, STs (excluding Tribes from Assam) and STs from autonomous districts in Assam in the Lok Sabha. Reservation of seats would be proportional the population of SCs and STs in each state. The amendment was introduced to implement the recommendation of the Advisory Committee to abolish reservation of seats for minorities except SCs and STs.  
A Member supported the amendment to provide reservation for SCs and STs due to their adverse socio-economic conditions. However, he was concerned that the SCs in Assam would not have any representation due to the decrease in their population after partition. The President clarified that there was no requirement of having a minimum population.  
Another Member proposed that reserved seats should be allotted to constituencies that have a relatively high population of SCs and STs in the concerned state. He believed that the apprehension in the minds of SCs and STs regarding their welfare can be fully addressed only if a more SCs and STs have a more influential voice in electing their representative. This could be achieved by having SC and ST MPs from constituencies with a large SC or ST population.  
A Member wanted to clarify that members of the SC and ST community could contest in unreserved seats as well. The Drafting Committee Chairman responded by stating that the law on elections would address this issue. On the other hand, another Member wanted to prohibit STs from Assam contesting in unreserved seats.  
A Member objected to criticism levied against reservation for the SC and ST community and stated that it was merely a measure to atone for the undemocratic conduct of the upper caste community.  
There were several minor amendments moved that were opposed by the Drafting Committee Chairman.  
All the amendments except the Drafting Committee Chairman’s proposal were either withdrawn or rejected.  
The Draft Article as amended by the Drafting Committee Chairman was adopted on 24 August 1949.  
Article 330 was amended in 1956, 1973 and 2001 to include Union Territories, calculation of reserved seats in autonomous districts of Assam and the meaning of population. Reserved seats for STs in autonomous districts of Assam would be calculated based on the ratio of the population of STs in these districts to the total population of Assam. Population would mean the population according to the last preceding census.  


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















