






























Asaf Ali - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Asaf Ali


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Asaf Ali
1888 - 1953




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Delhi
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography


 





Biography


Early Life
Asaf Ali, was born on 11 May 1888. He studied at St. Stephen’s College in Delhi. Later, he pursued law in London. He gave up his practice during Mahatma Gandhi’s first non-cooperation movement in the early 1920s and returned to India. He married Aruna Ganguly (1928) which caused a stir as it was an inter-religious marriage and there was a 20-year age gap between them.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Upon his return to India, he took part in the nationalist movement. He was elected as a Congress candidate and appointed as a Deputy Leader against a Muslim League candidate. Ali used his legal acumen to help nationalist leaders in courtrooms. The revolutionaries Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev, and Rajguru were defended by Asaf Ali, on the charge of throwing a bomb into the Hall of the Central Assembly.
He was imprisoned during the Quit India movement (1942). He was among members of the Working Committee of Congress like Jawaharlal Nehru who were detained in Ahmednagar Fort jail.
Ali also played an important administrative role. He served as the minister for railways when the Interim Govt. was formed in August 1946. In that capacity one of his first actions was the elimination of the separate supply of potable water on railway platforms like Hindu Pani and Muslim Pani. Both in his personal and political life, Ali sought to discard religious differences and promote harmony.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Asaf Ali was elected to the Constituent Assembly on a Congress party ticket from Delhi. He did not actively participate in the Assembly debates.
Contributions Post-independence
Ali was regarded as an important statesman. He was appointed as the Governor of Orissa twice (1948 and 1951). Ali played an important diplomatic role post-independence. He served as the first Indian Ambassador to the United States of America. Subsequently, he was appointed as the ambassador to Switzerland.
He passed away during his tenure as the Swiss Ambassador in Bern on 2 April 1953. In 1989, India Post brought out a stamp in his honor.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















