






























M.A. Muthiah Chettiar - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										M.A. Muthiah Chettiar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
M.A. Muthiah Chettiar
1905 - 1984




Key Information

Party: 
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
M.A. Muthiah Chettiar was born on 5 August 1905 at Pallathur in Chettinad, Tamil Nadu. He graduated from Presidency College, Madras (1922) where he majored in history and political science.
Prior to his political involvements, Chettiar worked for his family’s banking business. He was appointed as a member of the Provincial Banking Enquiry Committee (1931). Chettiar was elected as the President of South Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (1941) and the Federation of the Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (1943). He was the first mayor of the Madras Corporation.
For his services in the field of education and social life, the British government conferred knighthood (1941).
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
While he was not an active participant in the independence movement, Chettiar was deeply interested in various social reform movements and joined the Justice Party. Along with other leaders of Madras, he fought for the rights of non-Brahmins.
Chettiar had a vibrant political career. He became the Chief Whip and Chairman of the Justice Party in 1930. He was elected to the Madras Legislative Council in 1930 and later appointed as the Minister of Education, Public Health and Excise. Chettiar was also the Pro-Chancellor of the University of Madras and a part of IIT Madras’ Board.
He was elected as a Member of the Madras Legislative Assembly. When C Rajagopalachari formed a Congress Ministry (1937) in Madras, Chettiar became leader of the opposition in the Legislative Assembly.
He played a crucial role in the Assembly during his tenure as an opposition leader. In the Assembly, Chettiar opposed the introduction of Hindi as a compulsory language of study in schools and colleges (1938). However, he stated that he had no objection to Hindi being made an optional subject.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
He was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras. Chettiar did not actively participate in the Assembly.
Later Contributions:
Post-independence, Chettiar was elected to the Madras Legislative Assembly through a Congress party ticket (1952 and 1957). He was later nominated as a Member of the Madras Legislative Council (1963 to 1983).
Chettiar had a keen interest in Tamil language, literature, music, and culture. He was given the title of ‘Tamil Isai Kavalar’ (Protector of Tamil Music) by the Government of Tamil Nadu. He was instrumental in passing a bill to protect Tamil Isai (music).
The Government of India awarded the Padma Bhushan to Chettiar for his service to society (1973).
He passed away on 12 May 1984.
In 1987, the Government of India also released a postal stamp in his honour.


 



Resources



Life And Achievements Of Rajah Sir Muthiah Chettiar – A Study by Dr. G. Palanivel
Dr. Rajah Sir Muthiah Chettiar: A Biography by K Nagarajan



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















