






























Dr B. R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Morarji Desai Residential School, Gadag Wins State Finals! - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Dr B. R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Morarji Desai Residential School, Gadag Wins State Finals!


 
















Dr B. R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Morarji Desai Residential School, Gadag Wins State Finals!



Blog



Editorial Team






26 February 2024

Share









 
On 25th February 2024, the Grand Finale (State Finals) of the Dr B. R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024 was successfully completed at Palace Grounds Bengaluru. The quiz was conducted in collaboration with CLPR’s Constitutionofindia.net team as the Knowledge partner, and was organised for Karnataka Residential Educational Institutions Society (KREIS) school students.
Top two schools representing their districts from four zones participated neck-to-neck in this thrilling quiz about a diverse range of questions covering Indian Constitution making, history, geography, culture, among other topics. 

Victors of Zonal Rounds
The first Zonal finals were held in Kalburgi on 15th February 2024. Students of Morarji Desai Residential Schools, Kalburgi, and Govt. Atal Bihari Vajpayee Residential School, Bidar won first and second places respectively. About 140 students from 8th, 9th, and 10th grades from Pratibhanvita Girls Residential School, Jagat, Kalaburagi, participated as audience. 
The Second zonal finals were held in Belagavi on 17th February 2024. Students of Morarji Desai Residential School, Benakankoppa, Naragund, Gadag and Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Kulageri, Bagalkote made their way to the finals as winners of first and second place in the zonal rounds. 100 students from 8th to 10th grades at Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, added to the competitive spirit of the quiz. 
On February 19th 2024, the third zonal round was held in Mysuru. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Ilavala, Mysuru took First Place, followed by Morarji Desai Residential School, Kallabettu, Moodbidri, Dakshin Kannada. 70 students belonging to 8th, 9th and 10th grades from Morarji Desai Residential School, Varakodu, Mysuru attended the quiz. 
The final zonal round was conducted in the state capital, namma Bengaluru. Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Solur, Ramanagara grabbed first place, followed by Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Kakanur, Davangere in second place. 80 students from 8th, 9th and 10th grades from Morarji Desai Residential School, Adakamaranahalli, Bengaluru Urban watched the quiz and encouraged participants!
With a brilliant cohort of students from across the state, eight teams proceeded to the finals where their knowledge, critical and logical thinking and love for history, geography, culture and constitution making would be tested. 
The Finals
On 25th February, Palace Grounds was brimming with over a 1,000 enthusiastic students from schools and colleges across the state.

State finals quiz started off with a question on what Dr B.R. Ambedkar thought should be the basis of all executive and legislative Action. 

The team to which the question was directed to sharply and correctly answered that this was indeed the Directive Principles of State Policy!
First Place was secured by Morarji Desai Residential School, Benakankoppa, Naragund, Gadag. Interestingly, this was also the team that answered all answers correctly in one of the buzzer rounds called connect where students have to find the common link between four or five text, audio, video or image components. Students sharply deduced the connection, in a display of quick thinking and team effort!
Dr B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Kulageri, Bagalkote won second Place, followed by Dr B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Ilavala, Mysuru in third place!

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















