






























Chandrika Ram - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Chandrika Ram


 



Constituent Assembly Members
Chandrika Ram
1917 - 




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Scheduled Caste
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Chandrika Ram was born on 2 July 1917 at Saran in Bihar. He studied at the Goriakothi H.E. School and went on to pursue higher education at Patna University where he completed his masters. After this, he studied law in the same university– becoming the first Dalit lawyer in the region. He started practicing at the Patna High Court in 1945.
Role in Indian Independence Movement
Ram joined the Indian independence movement in 1942 by participating in the Quit India movement. He was imprisoned for his participation in this movement for 2 and half months. Soon after, he got involved with the depressed classes movements in Bihar.
Ram was a leading figure in the Dalit movement in Bihar. He served as the General Secretary of the Bihar Provincial Depressed Classes League (1941) and went to become its President (1947). He was appointed as the Provincial Supervisor of the Harijan Co-operative Societies and was the member of the Provincial Harijan Sevak Sangh (1944).
Ram also participated in electoral politics and represented the Congress party. He was elected to the Bihar Legislative Council (1946).
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ram was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 from Bihar on a Congress party ticket. He made key interventions on the issues of reservation for backward classes in employment and time limit for reservation.
Later Contributions
After India became independent, Ram continued his active political career. He was elected to the Bihar Legislative Assembly twice (1952 and 1957). During his first tenure as MLA he was General Secretary of the Bihar Congress and was the Parliamentary Secretary to the Bihar Chief Minister. In 1957 he was appointed as a Deputy Minister of Bihar. Later, he was elected to the Bihar Legislative Council (1962-1971).
Ram continued to work for various Dalit issues. He was appointed as the General Secretary of the All India Depressed Classes League (1947). He served on the Criminal Tribes Enquiry Committee and Committee for Social Economic Conditions of Harijans in Bihar as a member. He was also a member of the Harijan and other Backward Classes Upliftment Board constituted under the Ministry of Education by the Government of India.
Key Writings
Ram authored ‘A Plan for Harijans and Other Backward Classes’ in which he evaluated and made recommendations on the welfare activities aimed at the betterment of the depressed classes. He submitted this proposal to the Planning Commission.


 



Key Speeches



On the issue of including backward classes in Draft Article 10 (Article 16), Ram stated that while backward classes are not treated on par with untouchables, they are still underrepresented in the political arena. Further, he urged that when Harijans are given reservations based on their backwardness, other backward classes should be given similar protections.
On the 10-year time limit for reservations for Scheduled Caste communities, he clarified that the reason for demanding an extension of the time limit was that the political, social and economic conditions of these communities would not change significantly in 10 years. Instead of focusing on a time limit, he suggested that a committee should be appointed to evaluate the status of these communities and make recommendations.



 



Resources



Encyclopaedia of Dalits in India: Leaders edited by Sanjay Paswan and Jaideva Paramanshi (Gyan Books, 2002)
Who’s Who 1952 (Parliament Secretariat, December 1952)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















