






























Abdul Halim Khan Ghuznavi - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Abdul Halim Khan Ghuznavi


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Abdul Halim Khan Ghuznavi
1876 - 1953




Key Information

Party: All-India Muslim League
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Abdul Halim Khan Ghuznavi was born on 11 November 1876 into a wealthy and literary Zamindari family from Delduar village of Tangail district (present day Bangladesh). His mother was Karimunnesa Khanam Chaudhurani, a Bengali poet, writer and literary patron and his aunt Rokeya Sakhawat Hossein, was the revolutionary Bengali writer, educator and social worker. His brother, Abdul Hakim Khan Ghaznavi, would later go on to be a legendary political figure.
Ghuznavi’s mother was keen that her sons receive western education: the elder son was sent to London, and the younger one was sent to Calcutta. He studied at the City School and completed his undergraduate studies at St. Xavier’s College.
At the age of 24, Ghuznavi became the Chairman of Mymensingh Municipality.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Ghuznavi’s political career began when the British partitioned Bengal in 1905. Unlike other Muslim figures of the time, he opposed the partition. This brought him close to the Congress Party who protested the partition. He formally joined the Congress Party in 1905 and soon became a leader of the Bengal Provincial Congress. His association with the Party however was short-lived. He soon grew disillusioned with the Congress and left the Party in 1906. Without any political affiliation, he rose to become a prominent Muslim leader in Bengal.
He entered a legislature for the first time in 1926 when he was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly as an Independent. In his legislative career, he would go on to occupy important Statutory Committee positions which included: Railway Standing Finance Committee (1927-28), Advisory Committee of Railways (1927-30), Federal Finance Committee (1932), Minorities Committee (1930-32)
In 1927, he submitted a memorandum to the Simon Commission claiming that greater political power for Indians, without constitutional safeguards for Muslims, would make the Muslims ‘permanently in a position subservient to the Hindus’. Around this time, he joined the Muslim League and presided over the Kanpur Session of the 1929 All-India Muslim League Conference. He also took part in all three Round Table Conferences that were held between 1930 and 1933 as a League representative.
In 1936, under the leadership of Sir Ghulam Hidayatullah, he alongside a few other elected legislative members formed the All-India Independent Democratic Party. But this new political project didn’t work out and Ghuznavi left the Party.
Much like his mother, Ghuznavi was quite the patron of culture and an educationist. He was a member of the Dhaka University Court, the Aligarh University Court and a Fellow of the Calcutta University. He was among the Board of Trustees of the Indian Museum and a member of the Royal Asiatic Society. He also served as the President of both the Governing Body of the Government School of Arts and the Academy of Fine Arts in Calcutta (1944-47).
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Ghuznavi was elected to the Constituent Assembly from West Bengal. He was not an active member of the Constituent Assembly.
Later Contributions:
Ghuznavi did not have much of a political career post-independence. He chose to return to his village in Tangail after 1947 and quietly passed away on 18 June 1953.
Key Writings:
During his time with the Muslim League, he was actively involved in the publication of two of its newspapers, The Star of India and The Mussalman.


 



Resources


Abdul Halim Ghaznavi (Banglapedia Profile)
The Bengal contingent at the Constitution Assembly by Yajnaseni Chakraborty (GetBengal, 2022)
Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India)


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















