






























Monarchy and the Indian Republic - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Monarchy and the Indian Republic


 
















Monarchy and the Indian Republic



Blog



Siddharth Jha






12 September 2022

Share









 
									Queen Elizabeth II with the Prime Ministers of the Commonwealth in 1960. 
Image credit: Wikimedia Commons								

The recent passing away of Queen Elizabeth II has evoked emotional responses, commemorations and messages of condolence globally, but has also raised issues over the role of monarchy in a modern democratic setup. Our Constitution makers too had to engage with these issues, mainly along two dimensions: the future of the monarchical Princely States and the decision to join the Commonwealth.
The Objectives Resolution introduced on 13th December 1946 explicitly mentioned that ‘all power and authority of the Sovereign Independent India, its constituent parts and organs of government, are derived from the people‘. While introducing it, Jawaharlal Nehru made it clear that monarchy is not in consonance with this objective of a sovereign Indian republic. The entire Assembly was in agreement on this objective, so the question of continuing India’s relationship with the British Crown never came up.
But while India was to be a republic with a presidential head of state, there were several hundred Princely States within its territories that functioned under a monarchical setup. Under the Cabinet Mission Plan, these States had been given considerable autonomy to decide their future form of government in a federal setup. This included the possibility of a monarchy within a larger Indian republic.
The Chamber of Princes in 1917. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons
In the absence of the representatives of the Indian princes, who had not joined the Constituent Assembly yet, concerns were raised by members such as Syamanandan Sahaya over the wording of a part of a Resolution. Some of the Princely States which would have liked to continue in a monarchical setup preferred that power and authority be vested with ‘the sovereign’, rather than the people. These concerns were pacified by the Assembly, assuring the rulers that they would have the autonomy to decide on the form of government. It was accompanied by suggestions to make the transition to a constitutional monarchy guided by a responsible government as soon as possible, to fulfill the democratic aspirations of the people.
Once independence and partition were implemented, the changed situation called for more aggressive attempts to integrate the Princely States in a uniformly democratic Indian republic. Even though the lapse of paramountcy gave the States the authority to decide on their political future, the Indian political leadership was keen on their full integration. Thus soon after independence, N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar asserted that responsible governments in the States are a given, even if under a constitutional monarchical system. By November 1948, Dr. Ambedkar was able to frankly urge the remaining few States not yet fully integrated to “save themselves the bother of starting their own Constituent Assemblies“. Ultimately, all the States had to accede to the Indian Union fully under a republican system.
The Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference in 1949. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons
Another complicated question was the decision to join the Commonwealth of Nations as an independent, sovereign nation. Nehru introduced and supported this motion for pragmatic reasons, arguing that the King and Crown would only have a symbolic role. There were others who remained unconvinced, fearing that it would adversely affect India’s non-aligned stance and implicate it in the still continuing imperial project of the West. H.V. Kamath expressed distrust in Britain’s intentions in seeking to continue this body, and whether it would be practical for such a diverse group of nations to reach consensus. The final decision however, went Nehru’s way and India became the first republic nation-state in the Commonwealth.
In 2021 Barbados followed India’s example and severed constitutional ties with the Crown to become a republic. But like India, they continue to be a member of the Commonwealth. Other countries in the Caribbean region such as Jamaica and Belize were already evaluating their relationship with the Crown. With the Queen’s passing, experts believe that this movement is likely to gain further momentum.

Tags CommonwealthQueen Elizabeth IIBritish Monarchy 








Suggested Reading


Independence: A Tale of Two Declarations










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Founding of India’s Republic: Continuity or Departure from Civilisation?

01 June 2023
												• By Vineeth Krishna

The Sengol ceremony during the new parliament's inauguration was an attempt to depict India's founding as a continuation of its civilizational heritage. Did the Founders perceive India's transformation in similar vein?


 4 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















