






























Should Minors Have the Right to Convert? - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Should Minors Have the Right to Convert?


 
















Should Minors Have the Right to Convert?



Blog



Varsha Nair






04 January 2022

Share









 
On 21 December 2021, the Union government introduced a bill in the Lok Sabha seeking to raise the minimum age of marriage for women from 18 to 21. For now, the Bill has been sent to a parliamentary standing committee for discussion. Meanwhile, the Bill has reignited the long-standing public debate around adulthood. When does a minor become an adult? What decisions should minors be allowed to take regarding their lives?
The Indian Constituent Assembly engaged with these questions, not in the context of marriage, but religious conversion. On 1 May 1947, K.M. Munshi proposed that the Constitution outlaw the conversion of those below the age of 18. Purushottam Das Tandon supported Munshi stating that those below 18 were “immature” to take such a decision. So did Algu Rai Sashtri who felt it was wrong for a minor to automatically gain a new religion, merely because the parents converted.
Opposing the amendment, Frank Anthony argued for the right of parents to bring up their child according to the faith they wish to pursue. Rev. J.J.M. Nichols-Roy pointed the Assembly’s attention to the spiritual aspect of conversion. He suggested that if a minor wanted to convert to another religion, then the law should not interfere.
B.R. Ambedkar joined the debate by presenting the reasons why the Assembly’s Advisory Committee excluded a provision to outlaw the religious conversion of minors. Such a provision, he argued, would effectively mean that orphans have no religion. He further asked, what procedure would the children of converted parents follow regarding the rites of burial, marriage, succession, etc.?
The suggestion to outlaw conversions of minors was eventually rejected by the Assembly. The debate appears to anticipate the complexity of determining adulthood and the political, legal, and social implications of such an exercise. It mirrors contemporary debates around adulthood in contexts like labour rights, personal liberty, and political rights.

Tags Religious conversion 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















