






























Jaspat Roy Kapoor - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Jaspat Roy Kapoor


 



Constituent Assembly Members
Jaspat Roy Kapoor
1896 - 1984




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Jaspat Roy Kapoor was born on 16 October 1896 in Uttar Pradesh. After completing his post-graduation (M.A.), he pursued a degree in law.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Not much is known about his contribution to the independence movement in India.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Kapoor was elected to the Constituent Assembly from United Provinces on a Congress Party ticket. He was an active participant during the Assembly debates and spoke on matters regarding parliamentary privilege, separate electorates, and the retirement age of judges.
Contributions Post-Independence
He was elected as one of the members of the Provisional Parliament in 1950. He also served as a member of the Rajya Sabha representing Uttar Pradesh (1952- 1956). During his tenure in the Upper House, he was also appointed as the Chairman of the Committee on Petitions.
He passed away on 24 April 1984.
Key Writings
He authored a book on Insurance Law.


 



Key Speeches



During the debates around the dismissal of public servants, Roy vociferously advocated amending Article 282B. He argued that no public servant should be dismissed without giving notice and sought to delete clauses to enforce this.
He argued that the parliamentary privilege of speech guaranteed for members of Parliament should be extended to non-members as well so that they are immune to prosecution with respect to their intervention in Parliament.
Roy moved to amend the retirement age of Supreme Court judges from sixty-five to sixty during the discussions on the appointment and retirement of judges.
He also advocated for allotting reserved seats to constituencies where Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes members are more in number. He was against separate electorates and congratulated the minority communities for their cooperation in abolishing them.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















