






























Desk Brief: Indian Framers Deliberately Chose ‘Union of States’ - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Indian Framers Deliberately Chose ‘Union of States’


 
















Desk Brief: Indian Framers Deliberately Chose ‘Union of States’



Blog



Editorial Team






05 February 2022

Share









 
On 2 February 2022, in Parliament, a leader of the Congress Party referred to India as a ‘Union of States’. This has offended the BJP and triggered political controversy. A BJP MP has now filed a breach of privilege notice against the Congress MP. The notice expresses a concern that the manner in which the Congress MP invoked ‘Union of States’ suggested that ‘any state could be easily separated from our nation’ and that India ‘came into existence by means of a negotiation between and among various states’.
On 4 November 1948, Drafting Committee Chairman B.R. Ambedkar presented the Draft Constitution of India to the Constituent Assembly. The Draft Constitution distributed power between the Centre and the States – the States enjoyed significant autonomy over certain matters. And so, some members expected India to be described as a ‘federation’ of States. They would have been surprised then to find that Article 1 of the Draft Constitution opened with a declaration of India as a ‘Union of States’ and not as a ‘federation’.
Anticipating questions from his fellow members, Ambedkar told the Assembly that ‘the use of the word Union is deliberate’. He and his Drafting Committee colleagues wanted to signal that even though India was a ‘federation’ this was ‘not the result of an agreement by States to join the federation…’. Therefore, States did not have the right to secede. He added that the Indian ‘Federation is a Union because it is indestructible’.
It appears that the Drafting Committee feared that declaring India as a ‘federation’ allowed space for States to secede. The specific historical example that was taunting Ambedkar was the United States of America. He said:
‘The Americans had to wage a civil war to establish that the States have no right of secession and that their Federation was indestructible. The Drafting Committee thought that it was better to make it clear at the outset rather than to leave it to speculation or to dispute.’
If our Constitution framers were alive, they would have assured the BJP MP that they chose ‘Union of States’ precisely to indicate that Indian States could not separate from India and that India did not emerge from any negotiation or agreement with the States.

Tags Indian Constituent AssemblyDraft Constitution of India 1948 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















