






























T. Prakasam - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										T. Prakasam


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
T. Prakasam
1872 - 1957




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: 
Caste: 
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Telugu
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Tanguturi Prakasam was born on 23 August 1872 in Guntur district of present day Andhra Pradesh. He completed his high school education in Ongole and later pursued the Fellow of Arts programme at Rajahmundry. In 1904 Prakasam went to study law in the United Kingdom and upon completing his legal education, he returned to India and practiced law at the Madras High Court.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
During his time in the UK he interacted with Indian nationalist leaders like Dadabhai Naoroji, Romesh Chunder Dutt and Lala Lajpat Rai and was familiarised with their political views and the Indian nationalist movement.
The nascent interest he developed in the Indian independence movement was then fueled during his practice at the Madras High Court. Inspired by the speeches of Bipin Chandra Pal who was campaigning in Madras during the early 1900s, Prakasam decided to give up his law practice and devote his entire time to the freedom struggle.
After the execution of the Lucknow Pact (an agreement reached between Congress and Muslim League whereby Congress agreed to concede representation of religious minorities in the provincial legislatures in lieu of the Muslim league joining the Congress independence movement) in 1916, Prakasam regularly attended Congress meetings. He wanted the Indian independence movement and the concept of Satyagraha to be accessible to masses. He believed that the press was an important tool in achieving this accessiblity. He started a newspaper- ‘Swarajya’ in three languages- English, Tamila and Telugu. While his newspaper was not a success, it served as a platform for his involvement in ground level politics.
He took an active part in the protests against the Simon Commission and led the successful Salt March in the Madras Presidency. He was arrested for his participation in the Quit India Movement. His valour during the protests against the Simon Commission was rewarded with the title of Andhra Kesari (Lion of Andhra).
Prakasam was elected to the Madras provincial legislature in 1937 and served as the revenue minister. He won the elections again in 1946 and became the Chief Minister of Madras Presidency. During his tenure as a legislator, he promoted the cottage industry and proposed the closing of all textile factories in Madras. His government was short-lived and lasted only for 11 months due to internal differences with the Congress party leaders. After the fall of his government in Madras, he took a break from active politics.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Prakasam was elected to the Assembly from Madras on a Congress Party ticket. He intervened in important issues such as organisation of village republics and discretionary powers of the Governor.
Later Contributions:
Post independence, Prakasam worked towards the creation of the state of Andhra Pradesh on linguistic lines. He formed the Hyderabad State Praja Party in 1952. Prakasam was appointed as the first Chief Minister of the newly formed state of Andhra Pradesh in 1953. However, the government collapsed after one year.
He continued to work on campaigning for Dalit issues.
He passed away on 20 May 1957.


 



Key Speeches



T Prakasam being an ardent follower of Gandhi, proposed that village republics should form the basis of the Constitution. He believed that village republics, if organised on the basis of self-sufficiency and if made self-governing, could control inflation and stop balck marketing. He emphatically held that village republics could establish peace in India.
He expressed his disappointment in the Constituent Assembly failing to secure the division of Indian provinces on a linguistic basis.
While discussing emergency provisions, Prakasam proposed that the Governor of the province should be given discretionary powers during an emergency instead of deferring decision making to the Union.



 



Resources



T. Prakasam by P. Rajeswara Rao (National Book Trust India, 1972)
Andhra Kesari T. Prakasam by T. Suryanarayana Rao (Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 1995)
Andhra Kesari Tanguturi Prakasam (Lok Sabha Secretariat, 2000)
Those were the days: Madras’ Prakasam to Andhra’s Kesari, the CM of two states owes it to city by Venkatesh Ramakrishnan (DT Next, 2020)
.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















