






























Feroze Ghandi - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Feroze Ghandi


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Feroze Ghandi
1912 - 1960




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Parsi
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Feroze Gandhi was born on 12 September 1912 in Bombay. He was a student at Ewing Christian College. In 1930, he quit his studies to join the Indian freedom struggle. Later, in 1935, Gandhi went to London to complete his education at the London School of Economics and obtained a B.Sc. degree. In  London, he fully immersed himself in student politics.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
In the year 1930, Gandhi was imprisoned along with Lal Bahadur Shastri, when the British banned the Congress Party. After his release, he was imprisoned twice again in 1932 and 1933 while working with Jawaharlal Nehru on the agrarian no-rent campaign in erstwhile Uttar Pradesh.
As a student in England (1936- 1941) he actively participated in anti-fascism and pro-freedom struggle movements organised by Indian students. On returning to India, Gandhi was arrested and imprisoned for a year in 1942 at Allahabad for his involvement in the Quit India Movement.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Gandhi was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces through a Congress ticket. He was not an active participant during the debates.
Later Contributions
He was a member of the Provincial Parliament (1950-1952). Gandhi won his first general election in the year 1952 from Rai Bareli, Uttar Pradesh.
After independence, in the year 1956, Feroze Gandhi introduced a private member’s bill to protect the freedom of the press. He believed that Indians had the right to know about Parliament’s day-to-day functioning. This bill led to the Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act 1956 which allowed the media to report on Parliamentary proceedings.
In 1957 Gandhi was re-elected as a Member of the Parliament. He raised the issue of India’s first financial scam in the Lok Sabha and demanded an internal inquiry by an in-house committee. The investigation led to the resignation of the then finance minister, TT Krishnamachari.
Feroze Gandhi was married to Indira Gandhi, who became India’s first woman Prime Minister in 1966. 
He passed away on 8 September 1960.


 



Resources



 Feroze: The Forgotten Gandhi by Bertil Falk
Feroze Gandhi by Shashi Bhushan



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















