






























“The Advocate” | Film Screening & Discussion - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										“The Advocate” | Film Screening & Discussion


 



Film Screening
“The Advocate” | Film Screening & Discussion
Event Report by Kruthika R.









										26 Jan																			

2019


Film Screening



 Venue
Centre for Law and Policy Research


Share








On Republic Day 2019, the Centre for Law and Policy Research in association with The Students’ Outpost organised a film screening and discussion around “The Advocate” (Part 1), directed by Deepa Dhanraj.

The film documents “the remarkable contribution of K.G. Kannabiran in challenging the Indian State to uphold the rule of law in institutions of governance, justice and political praxis” (Magic Lantern Films). K.G. Kannabiran co-founded the People’s Union for Civil Liberties and is well known for his work on protecting the human rights of political dissidents and prisoners.

The documentary begins with Kannabiran’s role in peace talks with the Naxal groups and the government in Guntur, Andhra Pradesh. It chronicles his deep involvement, as a human rights defender, in the 1967-70’s communist peasants struggle to reclaim tribal rights. He challenged various human rights violations in court and through various government channels. According to him, the Constitution does not confer fundamental rights, instead, it confirms the fundamental rights which are inherent to human beings.

The film screening was followed by a discussion led by Kishor Govinda, Assistant Professor, St. John’s Research Institute, Bangalore. Kishor contextualised the documentary within the larger civil liberties movement in contemporary India and talked about the activists who were recently arrested in relation to Bhima-Koregaon violence.
Kishor argued that the civil liberties movement spearheaded by Kannabiran and his contemporaries were critical in foregrounding the rights of prisoners and this is one of the main reasons for the status of prisoner rights in Andhra Pradesh being better than its southern neighbouring states.
The event ended with members of the audience discussing various issues and events that the documentary touched upon.




Suggested Reading


Why India’s Constitution Framers Hated the Sedition Law



B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights



B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights






More in events





 Workshop



How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?
 Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai



Event Report


17 Sep
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















