






























Independence: A Tale of Two Declarations - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Independence: A Tale of Two Declarations


 
















Independence: A Tale of Two Declarations



Blog



Editorial Team






14 August 2023

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

On 4 July 1776, representatives of the thirteen American colonies signed the Declaration of Independence, marking their liberation from British colonial rule. In celebration of the 4th of July, annually recognized as American Independence Day, we decided to take a look at the impact of the Declaration of Independence on its Indian counterpart – the Declaration of Purna Swaraj.
After independence, the American colonies became states that were governed by the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union. It contained only four Articles which created a confederacy of states with a weak national government that was unable to enforce laws or borrow money. Realizing that this was an ineffective system of governance, representatives of the states gathered at the Constitutional Convention in 1787 to draft what is today known as the Constitution of the United States.
The principles contained in the Declaration of Independence were the ideological inspiration for this Constitution, which came into force in 1789. It is widely said that ‘the Declaration of Independence was the promise; the [American] Constitution was the fulfilment’.
Jawaharlal Nehru described the American constitutional experiment as one of the major inspirations for India’s constitution-building process. While the influence of the American Constitution on its Indian counterpart is well-documented, other instruments like the Declaration of Independence also played a role in the build-up to the making of India’s Constitution.
On 26th January 1930, the Indian National Congress passed the Declaration of Purna Swaraj or ‘total independence’. Lord Irwin, the Viceroy of India, was forced to backtrack on his promise to grant India dominion status due to opposition from the British public. This irked the Congress, who then issued this Declaration, marking the first time a national party demanded full independence from British rule rather than dominion status.
The Indian National Congress session of 1930 where the Declaration of Purna Swaraj was introduced.Image credits: Wikimedia Commons
In The Declaration of Independence: A Global History, David Armitage observed that while similar proclamations of independence had occurred in other countries, the Purna Swaraj Declaration marked the first time that ‘an anticolonial movement against the British markedly deployed the revolutionary language of the American Declaration’.
The organization of the two Declarations is remarkably similar. Both Declarations begin with preambles which refer to the inalienable right to life. They then go on to list the various crimes committed by the British Empire during colonial rule in order to justify the demand for independence.
However, there are marked differences in the content and purpose of the Declarations. The Purna Swaraj Declaration placed more emphasis on its aspirations for independence through non-cooperation than on the prescription of values. This is likely because it was intended to set out a blueprint to achieve independence, rather than a vision for a newly-independent country. Gandhi himself clarified that its purpose was ‘not to declare independence but to declare that we will be satisfied with nothing less than total independence’.
On the other hand, the American Declaration signified that British colonial rule had already ended in the country. Its purpose was to set out a vision for the future of America while simultaneously declaring its independence. The Declaration stated that the United States is ‘absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and…all political connection between them and…Great Britain, is and ought to be dissolved’. While both Declarations invoked an inalienable right to life, the American Declaration also referred to democratic rule, ‘liberty, and the pursuit of happiness’.
In the centuries since its’ adoption, the Declaration of Independence has inspired similar proclamations in several countries, particularly during the decolonization movements in the 1900s. In fact, when Subhash Chandra Bose proclaimed Azad Hind as the first independent Indian government, he relied on the language of the American Declaration to pledge his government’s ‘firm resolve to pursue the happiness of the nation’.

Tags Indian National CongressPurna SwarajAmerican ConstitutionAmerican Declaration of Independence 








Suggested Reading


Our Independence Movement Constitution



Monarchy and the Indian Republic



Constitution Day Quiz 2021










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

B.N. Rau’s ‘Outlines of a New Constitution’

26 February 2023
												• By Siddharth Jha

Sir Benegal Narsing Rau played a key role in the making of our Constitution, as Constitutional Adviser. In this blog, we draw attention to a document authored by him in 1946, which aimed at resolving the political deadlock over India's constitutional future, by presenting a solution acceptable to both the Congress and the Muslim League.


 3 mins										




 

Founding of India’s Republic: Continuity or Departure from Civilisation?

01 June 2023
												• By Vineeth Krishna

The Sengol ceremony during the new parliament's inauguration was an attempt to depict India's founding as a continuation of its civilizational heritage. Did the Founders perceive India's transformation in similar vein?


 4 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















