






























Article 44: Uniform civil code for the citizens - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part IV

Article
44



Uniform civil code for the citizens

The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.



 
 

Version 1




Article 35, Draft Constitution of India 1948
The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.




Version 2


Article 44, Constitution of India 1950
The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.




Summary


Draft Article 35 (Article 44) was debated on 23 November 1948. It directed the State to bring about a uniform civil code across India.
The debate around the Draft Article triggered conflict in the Assembly. Most of the opposition to the Draft Article came from Muslim members who moved amendments to keep personal laws out of it’s scope. One member proposed a proviso that would have operationalised the Draft Article only with the prior assent of the community.
The arguments mobilised to attack the Draft Article included — first, that uniform civil code violated freedom of religion; second, that it would create disharmony within the Muslim community; and third, that it was incorrect to interfere with personal law without the approval of the specific religious communities involved.
A Drafting Committee member defended the provision and argued that a uniform civil code was important to uphold the unity of the country, and the Constitution’s secular credentials. He reminded Muslims members that this was not a provision that would affect the Muslim community alone – even the Hindu community would be affected. He further added that women’s rights could never be secured without a uniform civil code.
At the end of the debate, it was clarified that there was nothing new about the uniform civil code: there was already a common civil code in India. The only difference with the new code was that it would cover marriage and inheritance – which were not under the scope of the existing code. It was also pointed out that this was a Directive Principle, the State was not obliged to bring the provision into effect immediately and it should only do so when it obtained the consent of all communities,
The Draft Article was adopted on the same day, without any amendments.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















