






























O. P. Ramaswamy Reddiyar - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										O. P. Ramaswamy Reddiyar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
O. P. Ramaswamy Reddiyar
1895 - 1970




Key Information

Party: 
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography


 





Biography


Early Life
O.P. Ramaswamy Reddiar was born on 1 February 1895 near Tindivanam, in present day Tamil Nadu. He completed his schooling at Walter Scudder school in Tindivanam. He joined the Indian independence movement as a young adult and enrolled in the Indian National Congress.
Role in Indian Independence Movement
Not much is known about Reddiar’s role in the Indian independence movement.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Reddiar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Madras Presidency on a Congress party ticket (1949). He did not actively participate in the Assembly.
Later Contributions
Reddiar was elected as the Chief Minister of the Madras Presidency on 23 March 1947 and continued to hold office till 6 April 1949 – becoming the first Chief Minister of Madras after independence.
During his tenure as Chief Minister, Reddiar made significant contributions to legal and social reform in Madras. For instance, the Madras Temple Entry Authorisation Act, 1947 – a landmark legislation permitting Dalits and other backward classes to access temples was passed during this time. The Tamil Nadu Devadasis (Prevention of Dedication) Act, 1947 was also passed under his leadership.
Reddiar took various steps to promote education in Tamil Nadu. He ensured that many children were enrolled in school by making elementary education compulsory. He set-up the Advisory Board of Education and the Provincial Basic Education Board to advise the state government on its education policies. Reddiar also implemented a scheme for adult education programs to promote literacy in the state.
Despite his strong leadership and significant contributions, Reddiar was forced to step down due to internal conflicts in the Congress party.
He passed away on 25 August 1970.
To commemorate his contributions to Tamil Nadu, buildings in the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly have been named after him. The Indian postal department issued postage stamp to honour him on 25 August 2010.
Key Writings
India’s Legacy, the World’s Heritage Dravidian. Vol. 1, Basel Mission Book Depot (1948)


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















