






























First Report of the Order of Business Committee Archives - Constitution of India




















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Committee Reports
								 ≫ 
										First Report of the Order of Business Committee


 





COMMITTEE REPORTS
First Report of the Order of Business Committee
27 April 1947
 



 







FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 






April 27th, 1947




CR.OB.1


We, the undersigned, members of the committee appointed by the Resolution of the Constituent Assembly dated the 25th January 1947, to recommend the order of the further business of the Assembly  have the honour to submit this our report.


















CR.OB.2


We met on the 5th March, and on the 21st, 23rd and 27th Aprii 1947. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru was, by special invitation, present at all the meetings of the committee except the one held on the 23rd. The statement of His Majesty’s Government made in Parliament on the 20th February 1947, has imported an element of urgency into the work and proceedings of the Assembly and, in our opinion, it is essential that the constitution should be prepared well before the end of this year. The task of arranging the order of business and of framing a timetable is, however, by no means easy. The political situation is developing with great rapidity, and the changes that are taking place inevitably affect the work of the Assembly. We are not, therefore, in a position at this stage to make final recommendations except in regard to the immediate future; and we request that we be permitted to submit a further report at a subsequent stage.


















CR.OB.3


We understand that when the Assembly meets on the 28th April, it will have before it the reports of the following committees :
(1) The States Committee appointed by the Constituent Assembly on 21st December 1946.
(2) The Union Powers Committee appointed by the Constituent Assembly on 25th January 1947.
(3) The Advisory Committee appointed by the Constituent Assembly on 24th January 1947, but only on the subject of Fundamental Rights.


















CR.OB.4


After the business connected with these reports has been disposed of by the Assembly, we recommend that two separate committees be appointed, one to report on the main principles of the Union constitution and the other to report on the principles of a model Provincial constitution. We consider that there are many advantages in having two committees, perhaps with an element of common membership, working side by side and considering the interrelated principles of the Union and the Provincial constitutions. The work of the committees will be of an exploratory nature to facilitate and expedite the work of the Union Assembly or the Sections thereof, as the case may be. After the committees have been set up, we recommend that the meeting be adjourned to a date to be fixed by the President at his discretion. We suggest this flexible arrangement partly in order that the Assembly may avoid difficulties likely to arise from the fixation of a date in advance and partly because experience has shown that committees are not always able to work up to a rigid timetable.


















CR.OB.5


The Constituent Assembly should complete its work by the end of October this year. A meeting will be necessary at the end of June or the beginning of July to consider the reports of the various committees and thereafter the matter of going into Sections. A meeting of the Assembly to finalise the constitution should be held in September.
K. M. Munshi
N. Gopalaswami
Biswanath Bas.

















 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















