






























This Month in Constitution Making (April 1947): Princely States Join the Constituent Assembly - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										This Month in Constitution Making (April 1947): Princely States Join the Constituent Assembly


 
















This Month in Constitution Making (April 1947): Princely States Join the Constituent Assembly



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






06 April 2022

Share









 
									Jawaharlal Nehru addressing the Constituent Assembly in 1946. Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

On 28 April 1947, the Constituent Assembly of India reconvened after a 2-month break. This sitting began with eighteen new members presenting their credentials to the Assembly President. In the early stages of constitution-making, fresh faces continued to stream into the Assembly. The new members who joined on this day marked something significant: the participation of the Princely States (henceforth ‘States’) in the Indian constitution-making project.
When the Assembly sat for the first time on 9 December 1946, the States were absent. The States were still reading the political tea leaves of the time. Now that the British left, should they aspire to be independent, or join the Indian Union? And for those States who veered towards joining the Union, questions remained: on what terms should they join the constitution-making process? How many seats would they get in the Assembly?
To settle these issues, the Assembly set up a Negotiating Committee that, as the name suggests, negotiated with the Chamber of Princes – an interest group comprising the States’ representatives. By April, it appears that both parties had broadly come to some agreement. And so on 28 April 1947, States’ representatives began to join the Assembly.
The Chamber of Princes in 1917. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons
The Assembly President in his opening remarks welcomed the States’ representatives and pointed out that ‘…the tremendous task in which we are engaged requires and expects assistance from all sons and daughters of this country whether they are living in States or in British India and whether they belong to one community or another…’.
The States representatives then took turns addressing their fellow Assembly members. The first was Sir Brojendra Lal Mitter, from the State of Baroda. Mitter said:
‘We, the States, are an integral part of India and we shall share the freedom with British India. We, therefore, want to share the responsibility of framing the Constitution.’
He continued to clarify that the presence of the Princely States in the Constituent Assembly was not by ‘sufferance’ but instead by ‘a right of being Indians’. Mitter reminded the Assembly members that unlike British India provinces that evolved political and administrative uniformity, the story of the States was different: ‘…Some States are as advanced as British India, where the people are associated with the administration. Some are absolute monarchies. Some are feudal and some are primitive…’.
‘We want unity in diversity’ he continued, and urged the Assembly to ‘exercise a little patience’ in the goal of bringing the States under a new constitutional framework.
Next up was K.M. Pannikar, from the State of Bikaner. He reiterated that the States were joining the Assembly on their volition. To those who claimed otherwise, he said:
‘To such precious gentlemen, as would advise us to pause on account of alleged coercion, I have to say clearly and unequivocally that their insinuation is an insult to our intelligence. Are we less patriotic in matters connected with India? Are we less concerned with the future of India that we have to take part in a cause in which it is our right and duty to take part?‘
This sitting of the Assembly was significant as it pretty much signaled the support and participation of the Princely States in the constitution-making process. This was far from a given in the political churning and uncertainty of the 1940s. Indeed, not all Princely States joined on 28 April 1947, but it did set the ball rolling and eventually, almost all Princely States came on board (except those that decided to merge with Pakistan) and actively took part in framing the Constitution of India 1950.

Tags Princely StatesIndian Constituent Assembly 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















