






























Forms of Oaths or Affirmations - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
						 ≫ 
						Schedules
						 ≫ 
						Forms of Oaths or Affirmations


 








Third Schedule

Articles 75(4), 99, 124(6), 148(2), 164(3), 188 and 219


Forms of Oaths or Affirmations





I.


Form of oath of office for a Minister for the Union:— “I, A. B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, 1[that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”




II.


Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for the Union:— “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.”




III.


A 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to Parliament:—
“I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Council of States (or the House of the People) do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.”
B 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament:—
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the People) do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”




IV.


Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India:—
“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India (or Comptroller and Auditor-General of India) do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and  faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, 1 [that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”




V.


Form of oath of office for a Minister for a State:—
“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, 1[that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of ……….and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”




VI.


Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for a State:—
“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the State of ………………..except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.”




VII.


A 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to the Legislature of a State:—
“I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.”
B 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a State:—
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”




VIII.


Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of a High Court:—
“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) ……….….. do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”








VERSION 1


Articles 62(4), 81, 103(6), 144(2), 165 and 195, Draft Constitution of India 1948
Forms of Declarations
I
Form of oath of office for a Minister for the Union
“I, A.B., do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, witheut fear or favour, affection or illwill.”
II
Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for the Union
“1, A.B., do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.”
III
Form of declaration to be made by a member of Parliament
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the People do solemnly and sincerely promise and declare that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”
IV
Form of declaration to be made by the judges of the Supreme Court
“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a judge) of the Supreme Court of India do solemnly and sincerely promise and declare that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or illwill and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”
V
Form of oath of office for a Minister for a State for the time being specified in
Part 1 of the First Schedule
“I, A.B., do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of _________ and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or illwill.”
VI
Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for a State for the time being specified in
Part 1 of the First Schedule
“I, A.B., do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister of _________ except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister or as may be specially permitted by the Governor in the case of any matter pertaining to the functions to be exercised by him in his discretion.”
VII
Form of declaration to be made by a member of the Legislature of a State for the time being specified in Part I of the First Schedule
“I. A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do solemnly and sincerely promise and declare that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”
VIII
Form of declaration to be made by the judges of a High Court
“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a judge) of the High Court at (or of)
do solemnly and sincerely promise and declare that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or illwill and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”




VERSION 2


Articles 75(4), 99, 124(6), 148(2), 164(3), 188 and 219, Constitution of India 1950
I
Form of oath of office for a Minister for the Union:—
“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or illwill.”
II
Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for the Union:—
“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.”
III
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament:—
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the People) do
swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”
IV
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India:—
“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India:—
“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India (or Comptroller and Auditor-General of India) do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or illwill and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”
V
Form of oath of office for a Minister for a State:—
“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or illwill.”
VI
Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for a State:—
“I. A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the State of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.”
VII
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a State:—
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”
VIII
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of a High Court:—
“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at or of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or illwill and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”




SUMMARY


The Third Schedule of the Draft Constitution 1948 (Third Schedule of Constitution of India 1950) was discussed in the Constituent Assembly on 26 August and 16 October 1949. It contains the affirmations and oaths to be taken by those holding the post of Union Minister, State Minister, Member of Parliament, Member of State Legislature, Supreme Court and High Court Judge.
This Schedule generated some debate in the Constituent Assembly—primarily on the matter of invoking God’s name in the oaths and affirmations. The Drafting Committee Chairman introduced an amendment to provide persons with the option of swearing in in the name of ‘God’. An Assembly member opposed this move on ethical and religious grounds. Curiously, the member insisted that since God was not a member of the Assembly and nor was his consent taken, the word ‘God’ could not be incorporated in the oath. Another member added that the people in these posts would be carrying out secular functions—it would not make sense to ask them to take God’s name while swearing in. He also reasoned that in politics one would have to do irreligious things and hence, the inclusion of ‘God’ was out of place.
A few members of the Assembly were also particular that the swearing in should precede the affirmation which did not invoke ‘God’. They believed that placing ‘God’ later implied that it was somehow less in importance. One member emphatically pushed for this change, adamant that a Constitution made to the liking of the Indian masses should have an oath that begins with the swearing in in the name of ‘God’. An amendment ensuring this change was eventually accepted by the Assembly.
The Third Schedule, as amended by the Assembly, was adopted into the Constitution on 26 August 1949. The Schedule was reopened for discussion on 16 October 1949, but no significant changes were made.















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















