






























Bhagwant Roy - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Bhagwant Roy


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Bhagwant Roy
1917 - 1978




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Patiala and East Punjab States Union
Religion: 
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Punjabi
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life:
Kaka Bhagwant Roy was born on 15 January 1917 in Ludhiana, Punjab. He was active in politics from a young age, as a member of the Students and Labour Federations. He joined the newly founded All India Students Federation, and was part of its Working Committee in 1937.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Roy was actively involved in the freedom struggle, participating in the Quit India Movement in 1942 for which he was imprisoned. He was active in the political scene in the Patiala Princely State, being elected as a member of the All-India States Peoples’ Conference from here. The AISPC was a forum for politically minded people from the Princely States to come together and collectively negotiate with the British.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Roy was a representative of the Patiala and East Punjab States Union in the Constituent Assembly. He spoke up for the rights of the people of the Princely States. He also intervened in the debates surrounding the allocation of subjects to different lists, arguing in favour of a greater role for the states.
Later Contributions:
As part of the Constituent Assembly, Roy was also a member of the Provisional Parliament that functioned until 1952. He was a part of the Trade Delegation sent to South-East Asia in 1950.
Not much is known about Roy’s political career following independence. He passed away in Ludhiana on 29 July 1978.


 



Key Speeches



Roy argued in favour of granting the states a greater role in industrial development during the debate on allocation of subjects to various lists.
On the eve of the adoption of the final Cosntitution, Roy spoke eloquently about the revolutionary nature of the document, which had taken power away from despotic tyrants and empowered the common people. He also spoke about the challenges ahead, pointing out untouchability and communalism as the greatest among them.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















