






























Harekrushna Mahatab - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Harekrushna Mahatab


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Harekrushna Mahatab
1898 - 1987




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Orissa States
Religion: 
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Odia
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Harekrushna Mahatab, popularly known as “Utkal Keshari” was born on 21 November 1899 at Agarpara village in the Bhadrak district of Odisha. He was born into an aristocratic Khandayat family. He completed his matriculation from Bhadrak High School before moving to Ravenshaw College, Cuttack.  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Mahatab drew great inspiration from the likes of Mahatma Gandhi. After observing the INC’s sessions in 1920, he left his studies to actively participate in the independence movement in 1921.  
He served as the Chairman of the Balasore District Congress Committee from 1924 to 1928 and also became a member of the Bihar and Odisha Council in 1924. In this role, he coordinated the boycott of foreign-made products in the Non-Cooperation Movement and was arrested for sedition. 
In 1930, Mahatab was elected as the president of the Utkal Pradesh Congress Committee. He drew inspiration from Gandhi’s famous Dandi March and spearheaded a successful salt satyagraha in Orissa, for which he faced imprisonment in 1930. In 1932, he was elected the General Officer Commanding Congress Sevadal (the INC’s grassroots arm) and was arrested when the party was banned. 
Mahatab famously participated in a movement against untouchability in 1934 and opened the gates of his ancestral temple in Odisha to all. 
In 1938, Subhash Chandra Bose nominated Mahatab to the Congress Working Committee where he served till 1950. In the same year, he was also made the President of the State Peoples’ Enquiry Committee. He recommended the withdrawal of state support to the princely states and their merger with the Odisha Province. Further, he actively participated in the Quit India Movement in 1942, for which he was imprisoned in the Ahmednagar Fort Jail from 1942 to 1945. 
Contribution to Constitution Making
Mahatab was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Orissa. He played a critical role in the integration of Odia-speaking Princely States into the province, but did not take part in the debates.
Later Contributions
Mahatab was the first Chief Minister of Orissa from 1946 to 1950, and again from 1956 to 1960. In this position, Mahatab is credited with formulating the modern-day contours of Odisha by steering the integration of 26 erstwhile Odia-speaking Princely States.  
Soon after his election in 1946, Mahatab pressed for the merger of the erstwhile Princely States having a geographical, linguistic, and ethnological affinity with Orissa. This was met with strong resistance from the rulers, who set up the Eastern States Union. However, this union was short-lived. Faced with acute maladministration, the State of Nilgiri faced demands for accession to Orissa. After obtaining permission from the Centre, Mahatab seized control of the administration of Nilgiri in November 1947. The other States followed through shortly and agreed to sign the document of the merger as a result of Mahatab’s tactical negotiation. 
Additionally, he was also instrumental in shifting the capital of Orissa from Cuttack to Bhubaneshwar and played a role in several infrastructural projects like the Hirakud Dam Project, Rourkela Steel Plant, and more. 
From 1950-1952, Mahatab served as the Union Minister for Commerce and Industry. He played an important role in setting up various industries and was heavily influenced by Gandhi’s views on self-sufficiency. In 1952, he became the secretary general of the Congress Parliamentary Party and even served as the Governor of Bombay for a short period from 1955 to 1956. 
In 1962, he was elected to the Lok Sabha from Angul and served as the Vice President of the INC in 1966. However, disenchanted by its left-leaning tendencies under Indira Gandhi, he left the INC and established the Orissa Jana Congress (OJC). The OJC had limited success, and formed a short-lived coalition government. Mahatab was imprisoned for opposing the 1975 Emergency. When the emergency was lifted, the OJC merged with the Janata Party in 1977. 
Mahatab retired from active politics in 1977 and passed away on 2 January 1987.  
Key Writings
Mahatab was a prolific writer who wrote various works during his time in prison. He penned a novel ‘Nutan Dharma’ and a drama ‘Swarajya Sadhana’ in his final stint in prison. He also authored the historical account History of Orissa. Notably, he set up the Oriya daily Prajatantra, in 1930 which remains in circulation even today. He also started a weekly journal Rachana, modeled on Gandhi’s weekly Harijan, with the aim of proliferating Gandhian discourse. He was the chief editor of Jhankar, a monthly journal, and also published and edited the Eastern Times. In 1983, he won the Sahitya Academy Award for his famous three-volume work Gaon Majlis in Odia.


 



Resources



Harekrushna Mahatab: The man who started the merger of princely states with India (The Print, 2018) 
How This ‘Lion of Odisha’ Took On the British & Helped Sardar Patel Unify India! (The Better India, 2018) 
H.K. Mahtab and the Merger of the Princely States of Orissa: An Introspection (Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 1989) 
Harekrushna Mahtab, While Serving My Nation: Recollections of a Congress Man (Vidyapuri, 1986) 
Dr. Harekrushna Mahatab: A Versatile Genius (Orissa Review, 2010) 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















