






























Kailash Nath Katju - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Kailash Nath Katju


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Kailash Nath Katju
1887 - 1968




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Provincial Constitution CommitteeSub-Committee I (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee)+1 moreSub-Committee II (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee) 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Kailash Nath Katju was born on 17th June 1887 in the princely state of Jaora (present-day Madhya Pradesh). He obtained his bachelor’s degrees from Forman Christian College in Lahore and Muir Central College in Allahabad. He began his legal practice in Kanpur in 1908. He came back to Allahabad to pursue a Doctor of Laws from the University of Allahabad. After obtaining his postgraduate degree in 1919, he was enrolled as an advocate of the Allahabad High Court Bar.
Katju went on to become an active figure in Indian politics. He was a member of the Congress Party and served on the Council of Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee and All India Congress Committee. Thereafter, he held several offices that include: Chairman of the Allahabad Municipal Board; Minister of Justice, Industries and Development (UP); Minister of Law, Justice, and Parliamentary Affairs for the United Provinces.
In addition to his political appointments, Katju was involved in educational and journalistic endeavours. He was one of the founding members of Associated Journals Limited, which published newspapers such as the National Herald. He also served as a Member of the Executive Council for Banaras Hindu University.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
A prominent lawyer, during the freedom struggle, Katju defended several political prisoners in controversial cases. This included the accused in the Meerut Conspiracy Case and the military officers in the INA trials.
Moreover, due to his participation in the Civil Disobedience Movement, he faced imprisonment for 18 months. Katju was further detained in August 1942, during the Quit India movement, for nine months.
Contribution to Constitution Making
He was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress ticket. He intervened in the Assembly on citizenship issues.
Later Contributions
After independence, Katju served as the governor of two Indian states: Orissa (1947-48) and West Bengal (1948-51). Thereafter, he became the Union Ministries for Law, Home Affairs, and Defence.
As a member of the Congress Party, he was elected to the Lok Sabha from Mandsaur in present-day Madhya Pradesh. He eventually became Chief Minister of the state in 1957 and held this post until 1962.
He passed away on 17th February 1968.
Key Writings
Katju wrote several books in his lifetime, mainly on legal practice and the legal fraternity. His books include – ‘Experiments in Advocacy: A Colossus in the Courts of Justice’ and a commentary on the Codes of Civil and Criminal Procedure.


 



Key Speeches


Katju argued in favour of conferring citizenship through on the basis of ethnicity (jus sanguinis rule).


 



Resources



‘Some Judges & Lawyers Whom I Knew’
Speech by Kailash Nath Katju



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















