






























Article 136: Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
136



Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court

(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment, determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces



 
 

Version 1




Article 112, Draft Constitution of India 1948
The Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree or final order in any cause or matter, passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India except the States for the time being specified in Part III of the First Schedule, in cases where the provisions of article 110 or article 111 of this Constitution do not apply.




Version 2


Article 136, Constitution of India 1950
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.
⁠(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment, determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.




Summary


Draft Article 112 (Article 136) was debated in the Constituent Assembly on 6th June 1949 and 16th October 1949. It defined the Supreme Court’s powers to grant special leave to appeal.
One member proposed deleting the language which restricted the Supreme Court from hearing any case on appeal from a court or tribunal of the Unions of States. He argued that since the Instruments of Accession gave the Central government the power to govern all matters except taxation, this created a pointless distinction between the princely states and the provinces. He also contended that it was improper to apply such jurisdictional limitations on the Supreme Court. This amendment was positively received by the Assembly, with several members making arguments in favour of an explicit expansion of the court’s powers. One member argued that the court should be able to determine cases using ‘the principles of jurisprudence and considerations of natural justice’. Another believed that the Draft Article should specifically be expanded to extend to ‘civil, criminal, or revenue‘ matters. A member of the Drafting Committee clarified that the Supreme Court was free to develop its own rules when exercising its jurisdictions, and that there was nothing to prevent it from interfering even in criminal cases.
The proposed amendment was accepted by the Assembly, and Draft Article 112 was initially adopted on 6th June 1949.
Subsequently, a member of the Drafting Committee proposed to wholly replace the adopted Draft Article with the following:
‘112. (1) The Supreme court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgement, decree, determination sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any Court or tribunal in the territory of India.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) of this article shall apply to any judgement, determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court of tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.‘
The addition of clause (2) was made at the behest of the Defence Ministry, who cited the examples of countries such as the UK following a similar practice of excluding decisions of court-martials from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. This amendment received strong opposition in the Assembly. One member argued that persons convicted to death in military tribunals should have the right of appeal because the procedures followed in such tribunals was ‘against all laws of jurisprudence’. Another contended that the civilians who committed offences under the jurisdiction of these tribunals would be unfairly deprived of their right to appeal. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee, who had earlier taken a different stance on this matter, stated that he had been convinced by the Defence Ministry that this clause was necessary to maintain discipline in the army. He also clarified that the Supreme Court was not fully stripped of its power with regard to the armed forces, as it could still examine whether a specific court martial exceeded its jurisdiction, or whether proceedings were completely arbitrary.
The amendment was accepted by the Assembly, and the amended Draft Article was adopted on 16th October 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















