






























Goa University take the crown at the West Regional Champions of ConQuest 2023 - Constitution of India































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Goa University take the crown at the West Regional Champions of ConQuest 2023


 



Quiz
Goa University take the crown at the West Regional Champions of ConQuest 2023
The Print team









										13 Oct										- 									
13 Oct

2023


Quiz



 Venue
Shankarrao Chavan Law College, Pune


Share









Winners of West Regional Round of ConQuest 2022 from Goa University.
India’s premier national quiz on the Indian Constitution, Politics and History—ConQuest 2023—hosted by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bangalore made its way to Pune after opening with a bang in Kolkata. The West Regional round hosted at Shankarrao Chavan Law College, Pune saw a total of 53 teams, consisting of 159 students from diverse academic backgrounds in the West Region.

Following a preliminary round, six teams secured their places in the on-stage regional finals: Armed Forces Medical College, Pune; Gujarat National Law University (GNLU), Gujarat; Goa University, Goa; Gokhale Institute of Economics and Political Science, Pune; Symbiosis Law School, Pune; and DY Patil College of Law, Pune.
The on-stage regional finals witnessed intense competition as the finalists put their knowledge to the test, tackling a wide range of carefully curated questions co-developed with Qshala, a curiosity based learning platform. One memorable question involved identifying the two women depicted in the artwork on the original manuscript of the Indian Constitution. Additionally, students were introduced to a lesser-known Constituent Assembly member, BV Keksar, who had a passion for classical music and sought to revive it through radio, during his tenure as the Information Broadcasting Minister. Notably, he controversially banned popular music on the radio and another activity he deemed a colonial pastime. After much head-scratching, it was GNLU who cracked the mystery, correctly identifying ‘cricket commentary’ as the banned activity.
The participants were also informed about a copyright infringement lawsuit against ChatGPT in the United States, citing multiple instances of unauthorized content generation. One such instance involved the creation of an unauthorized prequel titled ‘A Dawn of Direwolves.’ The teams were challenged to identify the series to which this prequel belonged, which turned out to be none other than the Song of Ice and Fire series, the foundation for the immensely popular TV show, Game of Thrones. This question underscored the ongoing debate surrounding the capabilities of AI and copyright infringement, shedding light on the future of creativity in the AI era.
 
Following five rounds of challenging questions, Goa University emerged as the champions of the West Regional Round, with Gujarat National Law University as the runners-up and Armed Forces Medical College, Pune as the second runners-up. ConQuest 2023 is now set to continue its journey in New Delhi for the North regional round.
 
This article first appeared in ThePrint on 18 October 2023.









One memorable question involved identifying the two women depicted in the artwork on the original manuscript of the Indian Constitution.
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















