






























IIM Calcutta win the East Regional Round of ConQuest 2023 - Constitution of India































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										IIM Calcutta win the East Regional Round of ConQuest 2023


 



Quiz
IIM Calcutta win the East Regional Round of ConQuest 2023
The Print team









										06 Oct										- 									
06 Oct

2023


Quiz



 Venue
Loreto College, Kolkata


Share










The East Regional Finalists of ConQuest 2023.
ConQuest 2023, organised by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bangalore had an exciting start in Kolkata with the East Regional Round hosted at Loreto College. A total of 33 teams from diverse academic backgrounds, including social sciences, humanities, management studies, and law, gathered to both learn and compete.
After a fiercely contested preliminary round, six teams advanced to the regional finals: Loreto College Kolkata; National Law University Odisha; National University of Juridical Sciences (NUJS) Kolkata; Indian Institute of Management Calcutta; St. Xavier’s College Kolkata; and Jadavpur University Kolkata.






The question bank, co-developed with Qshala, a curiosity-based learning platform, delved into various aspects of India’s constitutional and political history, shedding light on lesser-known figures and events. For instance, participants and the audience were intrigued by a question featuring a picture of Ammu Swaminathan, a constituent assembly member who criticised Jawaharlal Nehru for tolerating the title ‘Panditiji,’ which held an upper-caste connotation. Ammu Swaminathan was a prominent member of the Women’s India Association, one of India’s largest women’s rights organisations.
Another question asked students to identify a prominent Indian political leader who, unlike the prevailing political mainstream at the time, viewed the demand for an Indian Constituent Assembly as a ‘stunt’ and believed that a political revolution should precede it. This was none other than Subhas Chandra Bose.



 
The theme for ConQuest 2023 was Artificial Intelligence, and participants had a fun question challenging them to name a document that an AI chat program, GPTZero, erroneously determined to be the United States Constitution. This served as a reminder that AI programs, while impressive, are not infallible and should be used cautiously.
After enduring five rounds of intense quizzing, the Indian Institute of Management Calcutta emerged as the winners of the East Regional Round. They were followed by the first runners-up, National Law University Odisha, and the second runners-up, Jadavpur University. IIM Calcutta and NLU Odisha will now compete in the National Finals in Bangalore in November.
With the conclusion of the East Regional Round, ConQuest 2023 now moves on to the West Regional Rounds.
 


This article first appeared in ThePrint on 11 October 2023.


The theme for ConQuest 2023 is Artificial Intelligence, and a question at the Kolkata round served as a reminder that AI programs, while impressive, are not infallible.
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















