






























This Month in Constitution Making (August 1947): Constituent Assembly Appoints Drafting Committee - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										This Month in Constitution Making (August 1947): Constituent Assembly Appoints Drafting Committee


 
















This Month in Constitution Making (August 1947): Constituent Assembly Appoints Drafting Committee



Blog









03 August 2023

Share









 
On 29 August 1947, Satyanarayan Sinha moved a motion in the Constituent Assembly to appoint a Drafting Committee ‘to scrutinise and to suggest necessary amendment to the draft Constitution of India prepared in the Office of the Assembly on the basis of the decisions taken in, the Assembly’. This Drafting Committee would comprise the following members: Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar; B.R. Ambedkar, K.M Munshi, Mohammed Saadulla, B.L. Mitter and D.P. Khaitan.

Assembly members didn’t seem to have any problem with the membership of the Drafting Committee. The proposed members were rather well-regarded individuals with extensive legal experience in the legal field. However, there were concerns about the timing of the appointment of the Committee and its role in the constitution-making process. The first time this was brought up, was in B.G. Kher’s amendment that proposed to replace Sinha’s motion to make it more specific. It stated:
‘to scrutinise the draft of the text of the Constitution of India prepared by the Constitutional Adviser giving effect to the decisions taken already in the Assembly and including all matters which are ancillary thereto or which have to be provided in such a Constitution, and to submit to the Assembly, for consideration the text of the draft Constitution as revised by the Committee.’
The difference between Kher’s amendment and Sinha’s original motion reflects a certain tension that played out in the discussion that followed. The power of the Drafting Committee to ‘suggest’ changes to the draft prepared by the Advisor in Sinha’s version implied that the Drafting Committee could, on its own (without Assembly’s approval), take a view on a matter related to the Constitution. Kher’s version emphasised that the Drafting Committee was merely going to put into constitutional form the decisions of the Assembly and resubmit it to the Assembly for final consideration.
Sinha accepted Kher’s version, but these tensions were not resolved and Assembly members raised two sets of issues.  First, members feared that the timing for the appointment of a Drafting Committee wasn’t appropriate. Jaipal Singh argued that  ‘…a  great many important subjects are yet left over. They have not been decided by this Assembly and I don’t see how we can delegate our constitution making power to any Committee at all..’. Singh along with few other members wanted the Drafting Committee to be appointed after all aspects of the Constitution were first debated by the Assembly. This would ensure that the Drafting Committee was implementing the Assembly’s decisions and not taking its own stances on various subjects.
The second issue was regarding decisions already taken by the Assembly. After the Drafting Committee transformed them into specific Articles and clauses – would these then be set in stone? And not open to further debate and changes by the Assembly?
The primary concern that was at the heart of these two sets of issues was the relationship between the Drafting Committee and the Assembly as a whole. Assembly members wanted to limit the powers of the Drafting Committee and make it subservient to the Constituent Assembly.
Sinha clarified to the Assembly that ultimate authority lay with the Constituent Assembly – he stated that ‘the Drafting Committee’s Report will be before this House and this House has got an inherent right to alter, modify and change anything it likes. I think the Assembly has the right to change even the decisions.’ That said, he added that it ‘will not be fair if it [Assembly] goes on changing the decision which it has once taken and therefore I think the House will not agree to change the decisions on important principles which were discussed and decisions arrived at’. The President of the Assembly too chimed in and spoke in a similar vein to Sinha and assured members that real power was with the Assembly and not the Drafting Committee.
Members of the Assembly seemed convinced and they adopted the motion as amended by Kher.
This debate on the powers of the Drafting Committee and its role in the larger constitution-making process sprung up quite a few times in subsequent Assembly debates. The Committee faced allegations that it had included something that the Assembly had not aproved. For example, during the discussion on affirmative action, Thakur Das Bhargav remarked that the Drafting Committee had gone beyond its scope in making amendments to the Draft Constitution without the Assembly’s approval.

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















