






























Hukum Singh - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Hukum Singh


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Hukum Singh
1895 - 1983




Key Information

Party: Akali Dal
Constituency: Patiala and East Punjab States Union
Religion: Sikh
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Punjabi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Sardar Hukum Singh was born on 30th August 1895 in Montgomery, West Punjab. He obtained a B.A. LLB degree from Amritsar and Punjab University Law College. From 1921 onwards, he practiced law in Montgomery.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Alongside his legal practice, Singh actively participated in the freedom struggle. He was arrested twice, in 1923 for his involvement in anti-Simon Commission demonstrations, and in 1924 in connection with the Gurudwara Reforms Movement, which aimed to free Gurudwaras from British interference.
Singh joined politics through the Shiromani Akali Dal and later became active in the Montgomery Singh Sabha. In both organizations, he was appointed as President for three years.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Singh was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the East Punjab province on an Akali Dal ticket. During his time in the Assembly, he also served as the Puisne Judge in the State High Court at Kapurthala. His interventions in the Assembly mostly related to safeguards for the Sikh community and reservations for minorities.
Later Contributions
In 1952, he was elected to the First Lok Sabha from PEPSU, representing the Akali Party. On 20th March 1956, he was unanimously elected as the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha.  He was elected to the Lok Sabha for the second time in 1957 from the Bhatinda. Subsequently, he was re-elected as Deputy Speaker on 17 May 1957. During his time in the Lok Sabha, he functioned as the Chairman of the Committee of Privileges, Committee on Private Members’ Bill and Resolutions, Library Committee, and Committee on Subordinate Legislation.
He returned to the Lok Sabha for the third time in 1962, this time as a member of the Congress party representing Patiala. Singh was then unanimously elected as Speaker, making him the first Sikh to hold the post. In 1967, he was appointed the Governor of Rajasthan, a post that he held until 1972.
In 1973, he was appointed the President of the Sri Guru Singh Sabha Shatabdi Committee, which celebrated 100 years of the Singh Sabha movement.
Singh passed away on 27th May 1983. 
Key Writings
A keen writer, Singh launched a weekly English-language journal The Spokesman in 1951 and edited it until 1956. He also authored a number of books including The Sikh Case, The Problems of Sikhs, and Russia As I Saw.


 



Key Speeches



Singh argued for special considerations to be given to Sikhs as a minority disproportionately affected by partition.
He moved an amendment to Article 335, which would have ensured that the interests of all minorities are taken into consideration while making appointments for government posts.
He defended the right and safeguards of the Sikhs by pointing out the injustice done to the Sikh community while drafting the laws on reservations and proposed amendments to protect Punjabi as a language.



 



Resources



Biography of Sardar Hukam Singh, Partap Singh (1989).



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















