






























Har Govind Pant - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Har Govind Pant


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Har Govind Pant
1885 - 1957




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: 
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Har Govind Pant was born on 19 May 1885 in Almora district in present-day Uttar Pradesh. After graduating from Muir Central College, he obtained a law degree from School of Law, Allahabad (1909). Soon after, he started practicing law at Ranikhet (1910).
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Pant was a frequent contributor to the local newspapers that contained nationalist ideas. Through these articles he sought to influence and educate the masses about the political landscape in the country. He founded the Kumaon Parishad, a political movement that emerged to oppose the repression by the British. He was one of the leaders who was involved in grass-root level campaigns to build solidarity among people. Pant specifically focused on fighting against the oppressive begar system (forced labour) imposed by the British.
Due to his active involvement in various political movements, he was appointed President of the District Congress and also elected to the U. P. Provincial Congress Committee. Pant was a member of the All-India Congress Committee for five years.
Pant was the first to initiate the ‘Salt Satyagraha‘ campaign, and the ‘Quit India‘ Movement (1942) in Almora. In 1935, he was elected to the U. P. Legislative Council.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Pant was elected to the Assembly on a Congress Party ticket from United Provinces. He was not a vocal participant in the Assembly discussions.
Contributions Post-Independence
Pant was elected as the Deputy Speaker of the United Provinces Legislature on 4 January 1951. He was later elected as the Chairman of the Rules of Procedure Committee of the House, and served on all major committees of the Legislative Assembly.
He passed away on 18 May 1957.


 



Key Speeches



Praising Ambedkar for his role in drafting the Constitution, Pant conferred the title of ‘Pandit’ upon him. He also expressed satisfaction that a clause for cow protection was included in the Directive Principles.



 



Resources


‘My Father Har Govind Pant and Indian National Congress, 1885-1957’ by C.C. Pant


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















