






























K. T. Shah - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										K. T. Shah


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
K. T. Shah
1888 - 1953




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Fundamental Rights 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
K. T. Shah was born on 10 February 1888. He graduated from the London School of Economics and was appointed as the Professor of Economics at Mysore University in 1918 at the age of 30. In 1921 he moved to Bombay University.
Role In India’s Independence Movement
In 1930, Shah attended the Round Table Conference which was convened by the British to discuss the constitutional future of India. Shah represented the interests of the Princely States in these discussions.
The Indian National Congress appointed him as the General Secretary of the National Planning Committee, 1938. This Committee was set up to engage with unemployment, defence, poverty, economy and industrialisation.
Shah was a member of the Congress Experts Committee set up in July 1946 to prepare preliminary materials for the Constituent Assembly. This Committee, among other things, drafted the original draft of the famous Objectives Resolution.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Shah was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bihar through a Congress Party ticket. He actively participated in the debates. His interventions were passionate and well-reasoned. However, rarely did the Assembly accept his constitutional proposals. Shah was known in the Assembly to be a strong advocate for socialism and the presidential form of government. He often tried to smuggle these into his amendments and proposals even after the Assembly had rejected these ideas.
Later Contributions
Shah visited China as a member of an Indian Trade Union delegation.
He was a candidate in India’s first presidential elections. His main rival was his Constituent Assembly colleague Rajendra Prasad. Shah lost the elections.
Shah passed away in March 1953.
Key Writings:
Shah wrote extensively on administration, economics, history, and politics. His works include Sixty Years of Indian Finance, Splendor That Was India, Insurance, Promise That Was China, Federal Structure and Principles of Planning, Ancient Foundations of Economics in India, The Consequences of Post-War Price Change.
He was also a playwright and wrote plays in Gujarati.


 



Key Speeches



Shah wanted Draft Article 1 (Article 1 of the Constitution of India), to declare India as ‘Secular, Federal, Socialist’. The Assembly rejected his amendment. Interestingly, nearly three decades later, The Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) Act, 1976 inserted ‘secular’ and ‘socialist’ to the Preamble of the Constitution of India, 1950.
He proposed to include freedom of press within the ambit of Draft Article 13 (Article 19 of the Constitution of India 1950). He pointed out that all liberal constitutions have included such provisions and it was a pre-condition to have a ‘progressive liberal constitution’.
Shah made significant interventions in Assembly’s Committee stages as well. He proposed a fundamental right to remuneration for housework – an idea way ahead of its time – to the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights.



 



Resources



Citizenship and Its Discontents: An Indian History by Niraja Gopal Jayal (Harvard University Press, 2013)
Obituary, Prof. KT Shah (EPW, 1953)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















