






























Constitution in the Classroom: A Session with the Students of Mallya Aditi International School - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Constitution in the Classroom: A Session with the Students of Mallya Aditi International School


 



Workshop
Constitution in the Classroom: A Session with the Students of Mallya Aditi International School
Editorial Team









										08 Mar																			

2022


Workshop



 Venue
Mallya Aditi International School, Bangalore


Share








On March 8th 2022, the ConstitutionofIndia.net team conducted a ‘Constitution and Fundamental Rights’ workshop for the grade 6 students of Mallya Aditi International School.


The key purpose of the visit was to instil a basic understanding of why the Constitution was made, and what it contains. In particular, the workshop focused on fundamental rights, and the protection of such rights.
Vineeth from the ConstitutionofIndia.net team began the workshop with an important question—Why do we need a Constitution? He began with an example of a conflict on a football field, drawing parallels between a football rule book and the Constitution as a ‘rule book’ for the country. He talked about how the Chief Justice of India was akin to a referee—both persons read and understood the ‘rule book’ and gave instructions on its implementation.

Then, the CLPR video showing the making of the constitution was played. The students appeared particularly interested in this, as the video took them through the freedom movement and key moments in the history of the Constitution. This portion of the workshop was aided with pictures of members of the Constituent Assembly. The students were asked to identify and name Assembly members which rapidly turned into an enjoyable game for the students. In honour of International Women’s Day, the women members of the Constituent Assembly were introduced.
In a quiz-like format, Vineeth discussed the stories behind the drafting of the Constitution. He showed pictures of the original copy, and the famous calligraphy that adorns the Constitution. He then discussed the key Articles on Citizenship, Fundamental Rights and Powers of the various bodies formed under the constitution. Relating back to the analogy of a rule book, he explained that the Constitution establishes the relationship between the Legislative, Executive and Judicial bodies. Further, he explained that the Constitution governs the relationship between the Centre and the States, the States and the citizens, and the relationship between citizens.
The students very actively engaged in the next part of the workshop—the fundamental rights section. Beginning with an archival video of police persons dispersing peaceful protesters during the Indian freedom struggle. He explained that fundamental rights were inserted with care, because the framers of the Constitution had witnessed or experienced the deprivation of such rights in their struggles. After discussing the various clauses under Article 19, he quizzed the students about which clause would apply to the peaceful protestors in the video. This began a debate among the students on how the right to form associations, the right to freedom of speech and expression, and the right to assemble peacefully without arms, would interact.

Vineeth then played a scene from the film, Gandhi, which depicted Gandhi’s refusal to accept restrictions on his travel and movement. The students then discussed which right would protect Gandhi in this instance, and talked about the right to move freely throughout the territory of India.
The workshop shifted to discussing how the rights were protected by the Court. The students were taken through the process of accessing legal remedy. This session inspired several questions. One student asked a question about who may appear in Court, and whether only lawyers may argue a case. Another student asked whether children may appear before the Court, and who would fight a case filed by a child. Gauri explained that if an individual believes that they are best suited to fight their case, the law allows them to appear before the Court. Vineeth cautioned the students that this must only be done when the individual is fully aware of the nuances of the case and the functioning of the Court, lest they insufficiently represent their cause. He advised that a lawyer—well versed in the subject and familiar with the formalities of the Court—would be best able to appear before a judge. Gauri then clarified that a child may not appear before a Court themselves, and must seek the help of an adult. The adult—a parent or trusted teacher—may fight the case on their behalf.
The session was engaging for the students, who actively participated and asked interesting questions. The approach of quizzes, videos, stories and some theory appeared effective with the students.



Suggested Reading


Article 19: Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of Speech, etc.



The Making of India’s Constitution






More in events





 Workshop



Constitution in the Classroom: Sessions with the Students of Amber Valley School
 Amber Valley School, Chikkamagalur



Event Report


10 Jun
2022







 Workshop



Indian Constitutional History Workshop
 National School of Journalism and Public Discourse, Bangalore



Event Report


25 Jun
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















