






























Article 358: Suspension of provisions of article 19 during emergencies - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part XVIII

Article
358



Suspension of provisions of article 19 during emergencies

(1) While a Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by external aggression is in operation, nothing in article 19 shall restrict the power of the State as defined in Part III to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have effect:
Provided that where such Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only in any part of the territory of India, any such law may be made, or any such executive action may be taken, under this article in relation to or in any State or Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply —
(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made; or
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.



 
 

VERSION 1




Article 279, Draft Constitution of India 1948
While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, nothing in article 13 of Part III of this Constitution shall restrict the power of the State as defined in that Part to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would otherwise be competent to make or to take.




VERSION 2


Article 358, Constitution of India 1950
While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, nothing in article 19 shall restrict the power of the State as defined in Part III to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have effect.




SUMMARY


Draft Article 279 was discussed in the Assembly on 4 August 1949. During an emergency, it gave the State the power to suspend freedoms guaranteed under Draft Article 13, which included the freedom of speech and expression, freedom to assemble and form associations, freedom to practice any profession and, the freedom to move, reside and settle in any part of India.  
The Draft Article attracted a lot of criticism. One Member argued that it was redundant as Draft Article 13 fell within Part III of the Constitution that would in any case be suspended during an emergency through Draft Article 280. Another Member insisted that to infringe upon fundamental rights in such a manner was equivalent to declaring martial law. Further, Members pointed out that Draft Article 13 placed limitations on fundamental rights on the grounds of public safety, public order and security of the State. Hence, there was no need for Draft Article 279. 
A Member moved an amendment to replace ‘State’ with ‘Parliament’. He argued that since emergencies like war could go on for years, he only trusted Parliament to exercise the power to deprive people of their fundamental rights, not any executive authority. Otherwise, the Constitution, he continued, would appear to give rights through one provision and take them away through another. A Member supported this amendment stating only parliament was ‘competent’ to have such powers.   
The Drafting Committee Chairman defended the Draft Article. He opposed the amendment seeking Parliament to be the sole authority to suspend Fundamental Rights by pointing to the provisions of Draft Article 13 that already gave both the Union and State legislatures and executives to limit fundamental rights. He argued that there was no reason why such a power that existed in normal circumstances should be restricted to only Parliament during an emergency.  
He also clarified that there was no overlap between Draft Article 279 and 280. Draft Article 279 gave the State the power to make laws irrespective of its effect on the fundamental rights under Draft Article 13, while 280 gave it the power to suspend all fundamental rights under Part III. He felt that unless such a power to legislate was explicitly given to the State under Draft Article 279, the powers to suspend rights as per Draft Article 280 would have no consequence. 
Finally, on 4 August 1949, all amendments were rejected and the Assembly adopted Draft Article 279 as part of the Constitution.  
 


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















