






























Balwant Singh Mehta - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Balwant Singh Mehta


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Balwant Singh Mehta
1900 - 




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Rajasthan
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Balwant Singh Mehta, was born on 8 February 1900 in Udaipur, Rajasthan. He graduated from Maharana High School in Udaipur and Fergusson College, Pune. 
Role in Indian Independence Movement
Mehta was a key Congress leader in Vindya Pradesh (present-day Rajasthan). He was a member of the Congress Planning Committee, Mewar and Vindya Pradesh Congress’s advisor to the All-India Congress Committee.
His public life comprised significant civil society work. Meha was a member of many caste-based organisations that included the All India Adimjati Sewak Sangh, All India Marwari Sammelan, and the All India Oswal Mahasammelan.
Mehta was imprisoned twice (1939 and 1949) for his participation in the Indian freedom movement.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Mehta joined the Constituent Assembly in 1948 representing the United States of Rajasthan (a conglomeration of princely states). He did not speak in the Assembly barring one speech just before the Assembly adopted the Constitution.  
Later Contributions
Mehta was a member of India’s first Lok Sabha (1952) representing Udaipur. He served on the Parliamentary Delimitation Committee for constituencies of Rajasthan (1951) and the Delimitation Commission of India (1953). 
Key Writings
Mehta was on the editorial board of Lok Kala, a cultural magazine. Some of his publications include ‘Life of Mirabai and her songs’, ‘Maharana Partap’, ‘Fort of Chitoorgarh’, ‘Mewar Digdarshan’ and ‘Rajpootanai’. 


 



Key Speeches


A few days before the Assembly wrapped up constitution making, Mehta praised the Constitution, particularly the provisions on universal adult franchise and federalism. However, the Gandhian in him felt that the Constitution did not embody ‘Gandhism’ in the fullest sense.  


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















