






























Article 74: Council of Ministers to aid and advise President - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
74



Council of Ministers to aid and advise President

(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice:
Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.
(2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court.



 
 

Version 1




Article 61, Draft Constitution 1948
(1) There shall be a Council of ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions.
(2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court.




Version 2


Article 74, Constitution of India 1950
(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions.
⁠(2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court.




Summary


Draft Article 61 (Article 74) was discussed on 30 December 1948. This article regulated the exercise of the President’s power.
A member moved an amendment to regulate the selection of Cabinet ministers and restrict the number to 15 ministers. He proposed that the ministers be elected by the houses of the Parliament on the basis of proportional representation. This would prevent a majoritarian government. He also invoked the system in Switzerland to illustrate how the election of cabinet ministers would not result in any oppression or revolution. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee disagreed with these proposals. He argued that the Prime Minister must not be constitutionally mandated to have 15 ministers in the Cabinet; he/she might find it practical and efficient to have fewer ministers. On the proposal to elect ministers based on proportional representation, he urged that the Instrument of Instructions for President, that the Drafting Committee would draft, would take care of minority representation in the Cabinet.
There was another proposal to delete ‘with the Prime Minister at the head’. The mover wanted to keep the Prime Minister out of the Constitution. He argued that though the institution of Prime Minister was essential to carry out government business, it should not be mentioned in the Constitution. This would also prevent the power from centralising in the hands of one Minister. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee argued that the Prime Minister was indispensable to achieve collective responsibility of the Cabinet and to prevent undue influence of the President on the ministers. Further, in England too, the office of Prime Minister which had previously been recognised through convention, gained statutory recognition.
A member introduced amendments to allow the President to use his/her discretionary power without the Cabinet’s aid. He argued that the Draft Constitution provided with a similar provision for the Governor and the same should be extended to the President. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee pointed out that this proposal relied on the Government of India Act, 1935 which had given the Governor-General power to act according to his discretion. He reminded that under the Indian Constitution the President merely has certain prerogatives and not functions. Therefore, this proposal was unnecessary.
The Assembly negatived all the amendments. The Draft Article as introduced by the Assembly was adopted on 30 December 1948.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















