






























P. S. Nataraja Pillai - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										P. S. Nataraja Pillai


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
P. S. Nataraja Pillai
1891 - 1966




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Travancore-Cochin
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
PS Nataraja Pillai was born in March 1891 at Alleppey, Kerala. He was a farmer and a journalist. Pillai was elected to member of the Popular Assembly, Travancore – the first popularly elected legislature in India (1916). He was a member of the Travancore Legislative Assembly (1944-1947) and the Travancore Constitution Reforms Committee (1946).
A highlight of his political career was that he associated himself with multiple political parties which included the Indian National Congress, the Indian Socialist Party and the Praja Socialist Party.
Pillai was also actively involved in civil society. He had a keen interest in the study of Tamil language and promoted the Travancore Tamil Sangam – a cultural organisation – and became its director. He also the Director of Siva Prakasasaba – a religious institution.
Role in Indian Independence Movement
Not much is known about Pillai’s role in India’s freedom struggle.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Pillai was a representative of the princely state of Travancore in the Constituent Assembly. He did not actively participate in Assembly. Though he did intervene in a few discussions on taxation.
Later Contributions
Pillai’s prolific legislative career continued into independent India. He was a member of the Travancore-Cochin Legislative Assembly (1948-1950, 1951 and 1954-1957) and sat on a number of important legislative and executive Committees on subjects that included taxation, land tenure and unemployment.
Key Writings
Pillai wrote Arasyal Vilakom which was an introduction to the study of Tamil politics.
 


 



Key Speeches


Pillai criticised the manner in which the Draft Constitution divided revenue between the Union and State governments. He also moved an amendment to exclude State government-initiated business and trade from Union taxation.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















