






























Article 154: Executive power of State - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part VI

Article
154



Executive power of State

(1) The executive power of the State shall be vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by any existing law on any other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State from conferring by law functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.



 
 

Version 1




Article 130, Draft Constitution of India 1948
(1) The executive power of the State shall be vested in the Governor and may be exercised by him in accordance with the Constitution and the law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall-
(a) Be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by any existing law on any other authority; or
(b) Prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State from conferring by law functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.
 




Version 2


(1) The executive power of the State shall be vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
⁠(2) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by any existing law on any other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State from conferring by law functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.




Summary


Draft Article 130 (Article 154) was debated on 30th May 1949 and 16th October 1949. It vested the executive power of a state in its Governor.
A member proposed an amendment to clause (1) to replace the word ‘may’ with ‘shall’. He argued that the use of ‘may’ indicated that it was not binding on the Governor to exercise his powers in accordance with the Constitution and the law.
Another member proposed an amendment to the effect that the Governor’s power was exercised ‘on behalf of the people’.
A third member expressed discomfort with the use of the word ‘transfer’ in the context of clause (2), and proposed to replace it with the words ‘authorise or empower’. He contended that the latter was more accurate as functions were attached to a specific role and could not be transferred.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee was against the proposed amendments. He reminded the Assembly that the current Draft Article was a reproduction of Draft Article 42 (Article 53) relating to the executive powers of the Union, and similar amendments had been rejected during the debates on that Draft Article.
All three amendments were negatived by the Assembly. The Draft Article was initially adopted on 30th May 1949.
Subsequently, the language of Draft Article 42 was amended. A member of the Drafting Committee proposed that the words ‘may be exercised by him‘ be substituted for ‘shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him‘, in order to mirror the language used in Draft Article 42. The amendment was accepted on 16th October 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















