






























Raghib Ahsan - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Raghib Ahsan


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Raghib Ahsan
1905 - 1975




Key Information

Party: All-India Muslim League
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Urdu
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Allama Raghib Ahsan was born in 1905 in Neodhi village in Bihar, to Munshi Riazuddin, a government employee. His family later relocated to Calcultta, where Ahsan pursued his higher education. He graduated with a B.A. and M.A from Calcutta University.
It was in Calcutta that Ahsan became involved in politics, starting with his involvement in the Khilafat movement at the age of 13 under the leadership of Maulana Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali. Ahsan became an acquaintance of Muhammad Iqbal, known as the ‘Spiritual Father of Pakistan’, in 1929 and remained his close confidante till Iqbal’s death in 1938.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
His participation in the freedom struggle began when the Khilafat movement joined forces with Gandhi’s Non-Cooperation movement to mobilise the masses towards self-determination. As a result, he was arrested in 1922.
In 1931, Ahsan formed the All India Muslim Youth League. He also helped lay the foundation of Calcutta Muslim League in 1936 and became a member of the All India Muslim League Council in 1937.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ahsan was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Calcutta, in 1946 on a Muslim League ticket. He did not actively participate in the debates.
Later Contributions
Post-partition, Ahsan remained in India, where he continued to advocate for various issues concerning Muslims. He eventually fled to Dhaka in erstwhile East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) to escape persecution for his political views.
Ahsan played a crucial role in the Pakistani constitution-building process. His ideas for a welfare state were included in the Objectives Resolution which defined the founding principles of the Pakistani Constitution.
Ahsan remained in Dhaka, where he joined the Pakistan Democratic Party and opposed the creation of Bangladesh. After the formation of Bangladesh in 1972, he relocated to Karachi, where he passed away on 28th November 1975.
Key Writings
Ahsan was a prolific writer who served as the editor of the weekly newspapers Star in Allahabad and the Calcutta-based Star of India. He regularly contributed to the Comrade and Hamdard magazines.
His notable works include Jihad for Millathood, Kitab-i-Mubeen, and Light from the East. He also authored important historical works such as The Pakistan Commonwealth, The Principles of Islamic Economics, and History of the Making of the Muslim Nation in India.
 


 



Resources



Allamah Raghib Ahsan, Quaid-i-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah correspondence (1936-1947) (Islamabad : National Institute of Historical and Cultural Research, Centre of Excellence, Quaid-i-Azam University, 2010).
Iqbal Janah-i-Digar: A Collection of Iqbal’s Letters to Allama Raghib Ahsan by M. Faridul Haque (Islamic Research Institute, International Islamic University, Islamabad, 1986)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















