






























‘Was India's Independence Movement Solely About Freedom from the British?': A CLPR Session at Ranga Shankara - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										‘Was India’s Independence Movement Solely About Freedom from the British?’: A CLPR Session at Ranga Shankara


 



Talks
‘Was India’s Independence Movement Solely About Freedom from the British?’: A CLPR Session at Ranga Shankara
Varsha Nair









										06 Aug																			

2022


Talks



 Venue
Ranga Shankara, Bangalore


Share








The Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR) has collaborated with Ranga Shankara to hold a series of conversations on the Indian Constitution and its history as part of the latter’s public outreach programme—RS Connect. 

On 6 August 2022 we held the second public talk in this series. CLPR resource persons delved into the Indian Freedom Movement and emphasized that it was more than just a call to free Indians from British rule. The session further demonstrated that the Indian Constitution – specifically the Fundamental Rights chapter – was forged in the crucible of India’s independence movement.

CLPR Senior Associate Vineeth Krishna began the session with a simple inquiry—what exactly are we celebrating when we celebrate Indian Independence Day? Were we celebrating the fact that we were independent or the freedom movement that brought us independence? He explained that it was the movement. This provided the impetus to explore the unique qualities of the Indian freedom movement, particularly how this extraordinary political movement also had a radical vision for the socio-economic transformation of the Indian society.
Vineeth then took the audience through the tumultuous 1931 Karachi Congress and the Karachi Resolution which was a Historical Constitution that had provisions for socio-economic rights. This provided a glimpse of how leaders of the movement, like MN Roy and Jawaharlal Nehru, were deeply invested in ensuring socio-economic rights were a part of our constitutional future.
He next drew the connection between the Indian Independence Movement and the Indian Constitution. He explained how the experiences of the Constitution framers during the Freedom Movement shaped the way they framed fundamental rights provisions in the Constitution. For instance, the bleak experience of being slapped with sedition cases under the British led to the Framers opposing ‘sedition’ as a limitation on freedom of speech.

Vineeth then concluded that there was a need to celebrate Independence Day on August 15 with the understanding that the freedom movement not only sought an end to British rule, but also an end to India’s deep rooted socio-economic hierarchies like caste and class. The movement called for a concerted effort to transform Indian society from its feudal past to a progressive society where individuals and communities were empowered with socio-economic rights enshrined in the Constitution.
The talk was followed by a lively question-answer session with the audience.



Suggested Reading


The Karachi Resolution 1931 with Prof. Kama Maclean



Our Independence Movement Constitution



Our Independence Movement Constitution






More in events





 Talks



‘How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?’: A CLPR session at Ranga Shankara
 Ranga Shankara, Bangalore



Event Report


02 Jul
2022







 Talks



New Website Launch
 CLPR Office




						15 Mar											



						Wednesday					

							12:00 am - 2:00 pm						

2023

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















