






























Students Quizzed on Indian Constitution, History, Politics as Fourth Edition of ConQuest Begins - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Students Quizzed on Indian Constitution, History, Politics as Fourth Edition of ConQuest Begins


 



Quiz
Students Quizzed on Indian Constitution, History, Politics as Fourth Edition of ConQuest Begins
The Print team









										10 Aug																			

2019


Quiz



 Venue
St. Joseph's College of Law, Bengaluru


Share








The fourth edition of ConQuest 2019 — India’s premiere national quiz on Indian Constitution, history and politics — began Saturday with its South-regional round held in St Joseph’s College of Law, Bengaluru.

As many as 75 teams participated from various colleges across south India and only six teams made it to the final round. The finalists faced multiple rounds of questions pertaining to the Constitution, the pre-Independence history and the country’s politics.
Students participating in the preliminary round
For instance, “Which institution was established by Sir Arthur Cotton, generally worshipped as the water god, to help neglected locals?” All teams got the answer wrong, except for one.
The answer: The Public Works Department (PWD).
Similarly, the teams had to face a series of questions on the Indian Constitution and history.
“Which word of constitutional importance owes its origin to a Latin word which meant, ‘walking before’?” Answer: the Preamble.
“Which particular institution has inspired the design of 1Q1 — an Asian Kitchen and Bar in Bengaluru?” Answer: The High Court of Karnataka.
As the quiz picked up pace and moved into successive rounds, the difficulty of the questions too increased.
In one of the rounds, called “Connect”, the teams were required to connect four clues given by the quiz master to get the answer. One of the questions, for example, was “What connects Satyajit Ray, Ustad Bismillah Khan, Lata Mangeshkar and APJ Abdul Kalam?” They were the only four people to win Bharat Ratna as well as the Padma awards.
Finalists on stage
The final round or the “buzzer round” was easily the most thrilling and nerve-wracking part of the quiz. With teams jumping on the opportunity to improve their score count, the round got extremely intense.
On the off-chance that no team managed to get the right answer, the question was thrown at the audience, which was highly interactive and engaging.
In the end, the team from National Law School of India and one from University of Hyderabad won the final round and will now make it to the Nationals.
Karnataka High Court Judge Justice Dixit Krishna Shripad was the chief guest of the event and Reverend Father Manoj D’Souza was the Guest of Honour.
“The quiz exposed everyone to so much information about the Constitution, the constitutional history and its making. I enjoyed myself so much that I didn’t realise how time flew by,” said Justice Shripad.


This report first appeared in ThePrint on 26 August 2019.



Suggested Reading


Preamble






More in events





 Quiz



ConQuest: India’s Premier National Quiz on the Indian Constitution, History and Politics
 All over India



Event Report


01 Oct
2016







 Quiz



IIT-KGP and NUJS Teams Qualify for ConQuest Finals at Eastern Round in Kolkata
 Loreto College, Kolkata



Event Report


17 Aug
2019


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















