






























Sarangadhar Das - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Sarangadhar Das


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Sarangadhar Das
1886 - 1957




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Odia
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Sarangadhar Das, was born on 17 October 1886 in Dhenakana, Orissa. He graduated from Ravenshaw College in Cuttack and later traveled to Japan to study at the Tokyo Institute of Technology. Two years later, Das studied Sugar Technology at the University of California, Berkeley (1909).
Role in Indian Independence Movement
Das resigned from the Congress Party to join the Socialist Party and was an active participant in the All-Orissa States’ Peoples’ Movement. The All-Orissa States’ Peoples’ Movement demanded a responsible government in all Princely States. This movement gave momentum to Das’s leadership. He also worked on upliftment of tribal groups and lower caste communities.
Das was elected as the President of the Orissa and Central Provinces States Regional Council (1946-1947). He also served as the member of the Standing Committee of the All-India States People’s Conference (1939-1943) and a member of the All-India Congress Committee (1939-1945).
Contribution to Constitution Making
Das represented the Eastern Princely States in the Assembly. He was not an active participant in the Assembly debates. However, he did make a few interventions on the control of Princely States by the President.
Later Contributions
Das had an active political career. He served as a member of the Orissa Legislative Assembly (1946-1949) and India’s Provincial Parliament. Das was the Chairman of the Socialist Party (Utkal- 1951-1952) as well as the Deputy Leader of the Praja Socialist Party (1952-1953).
He passed away at the age of 70 on 19 September 1957, in Cuttack.
Key Writings
Das regularly wrote about various struggles of the masses in the journal Krushak. Two of his published works include The Development of Sugar Industry in India and Bikaner— a Political and Economic Survey.


 



Key Speeches


Das objected to the inclusion of Draft Article 306B (Article 371, Constitution of India 1950) which stated that the Government of a Princely State will be under the general control of the President and should comply with their general directions for a period of 10 years from the commencement of the Constitution. He argued that the Draft Article was against the principle of democracy and that such a provision could lead to bureaucratic governance.


 



Resources


Socialist Movement and Sarangadhar Das by Akshaya Kumar Patra (Odisha Review, April 2012).


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















