






























Hiralal Shastri - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Hiralal Shastri


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Hiralal Shastri
1899 - 1974




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Rajasthan
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Hiralal Shastri was born on 24 November 1899 in Jobner town, Jaipur district, Rajasthan. He completed his Bachelor of Arts at Maharaja College, Jaipur. He subsequently joined the Jaipur State Service and rose to the rank of Secretary in the Home and Foreign Departments. In 1927, Shastri left the Services to pursue a more active role in the field of social welfare. In 1929, he founded an organization called ‘Jeevan Kutir’ and trained a band of dedicated social workers, and endeavoured to implement a programme for rural reconstruction. He was also the founder of Banasthali Vidyapith which continues to serve as a premier national institution for women’s education even today.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Shastri was the President of the Praja Mandal, a freedom movement in the 1920s that was being led by the people residing in princely states against their rulers and the British Government. In 1939, Shastri was imprisoned for six months due to his participation in Praja Mandal’s Satyagraha movement to achieve civil liberties.
Contribution to Constitution Making
A member of the Indian National Congress, Shastri was representative of the princely state of Rajasthan in the Constituent Assembly. In the Assembly, he discussed the integration of different states into the Union of India and the need for all representatives to have an equal say in the Constitution-making process. 
Later Contributions
After Rajasthan was established as a State on 30 March 1949, Hiralal Shastri became its first Chief Minister. He subsequently resigned from the post in 1951 but returned to active politics in 1957 and was elected to be a member of the second Lok Sabha from Sawai Madhopur constituency in Rajasthan.
He passed away on 28 December 1974.


 



Key Speeches



In his speech about the integration of states into the Indian Union, Shastri was of the opinion that while larger States should be allowed to enter the Union as separate entities, the smaller states should only be allowed to enter the Union in groups. He claimed that if separate units were made of the smaller states, it would solely be for the purpose of elections and serve no functional purpose. 
In another intervention concerning the members of the Constituent Assembly, Shastri acknowledged that some of the members in the Assembly were not directly elected by the people and were instead present due to nomination or by the virtue of them being rulers of their states. He went on to state that despite this, all the members of the Constituent Assembly were members by right and therefore, there could be no reasonable basis to disallow them from exercising an equal say in the Constitution-making process.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















