






























Lakshmi Kanta Maitra - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Lakshmi Kanta Maitra


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Lakshmi Kanta Maitra
1895 - 1953




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Calcutta
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bengali
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra was born on 23 July 1895 at Narayangunj in present-day Bangladesh. He completed his undergraduate course at Dacca Government College and then studied law at Calcutta University Law College.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Maitra was the Secretary of Congress Nationalist Party (1934-1945) – a party that split from the Congress in 1934 to protest the communal award announced in 1932. He was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly (1934-1936) and was re-elected again in 1946 from the Calcutta constituency. He also served as a member of the provisional Parliament of India.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Maitra was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 on a Congress party ticket from West Bengal. He intervened in debates around issues like freedom of religion and the national language of India.
Later Contributions
He was elected to the First Lok Sabha in 1952 from the Parliamentary Constituency of Nabadwip, West Bengal.
Maitra also took on a range of administrative roles. He chaired the Food Grains Investigation Committee in 1950 and served in the Food Grains Procurement Committee in 1950.
He was a member of the Special Police Establishment Enquiry Committee (1949-1952) that was constituted to review the Prevention of Corruption Act 1947 and to assess the functioning of the Special Police Establishment (later renamed as the ‘Central Bureau of Investigation’) in curbing corruption.
He passed away on 25 July 1953.


 



Key Speeches



Maitra wanted Sanskrit to be the official and national language of India. He stated that all Indian languages were derived from Sanskrit – a language he felt could unify Indians.
He stated that the right to freedom of religion did not violate secularism.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















