






























Part XI Archives - Constitution of India






















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII







 
Part XI
Relations between the Union and the States
Part XI of the Constitution deals with the relations between the Union and the States in the legislative and administrative spheres, including the extent of their legislative and executive powers, and provisions for co-operation.
Read More 


 





ARTICLES 245 to 263





Chapter I.—Legislative Relations




Article 245: Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States


Article 246: Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States


Article 246A: Special provision with respect to goods and services tax


Article 247: Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain additional courts


Article 248: Residuary powers of legislation


Article 249: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the State List in the national interest


Article 250: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the State List if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation


Article 251: Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles 249 and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States


Article 252: Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State


Article 253: Legislation for giving effect to international agreements


Article 254: Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States


Article 255: Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to be regarded as matters of procedure only








Chapter II.—Administrative Relations




Article 256: Obligation of States and the Union


Article 257: Control of the Union over States in certain cases


Article 257A: Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other forces of the Union


Article 258: Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain cases


Article 258A: Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union


Article 259: Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule


Article 260: Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India


Article 261: Public acts, records and judicial proceedings


Article 262: Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers or river valleys


Article 263: Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council





 
 



 
More About Part XI: Relations between the Union and the States

Part XI of the Constitution deals with the relations between the Union and the States in the legislative and administrative spheres, including the extent of their legislative and executive powers, and provisions for co-operation.




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















