






























K. Santhanam - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										K. Santhanam


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
K. Santhanam
1895 - 1980




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: The Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Kasturiranga Santhanam was born in 1895 at Madras. He obtained his law degree from Law College, Madras. From 1920, he practiced at the High Court of Madras.
Santhanam also served as the first editor of the Indian Express from 1932 until 1940; subsequently, he became the joint editor of the Hindustan Times. During his time at the Indian Express, he also was a member of the Legislative Assembly. A staunch Congressman, he was part of the All India Congress Committees.
In 1944, Santhanam became the Joint Secretary of the Sapru Committee.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Santhanam was very active in the freedom struggle. He participated in the Non-Cooperation and Satyagraha movements, and was imprisoned thrice for his role in the latter. From 1922 to 1930, he organized movements to encourage khadi production all over Tamil Nadu.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Santhanam was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras on a Congress Party ticket. He often spoke in the Assembly, and some of his key interventions were on adult franchise, local governance, and citizenship.
Later Contributions
In 1948, Santhanam was appointed as the Minister of State for Transport. He later became the Lieutenant Governor of Vindhya Pradesh.
In 1962, Santhanam was appointed as the chairman of the Committee on Prevention of Corruption. The recommendations of this Committee, also known as the Santhanam Committee, resulted in the establishment of the Central Vigilance Commission in 1964.
Santhanam passed away on 28th February 1980.
Key Writings
A prolific writer, Santhanam wrote on subjects ranging from politics to literature. Some of his notable works include An Anthology of Indian Literature, Gospel of Gandhi, Union-State Relations in India, and Looking Back: Memoirs of K. Santhanam (1895-1980).


 



Key Speeches



During the period when the provinces were preparing the electoral rolls for the first general elections, Santhanam argued in favour of the rolls being maintained by the Central Government to ensure that nobody was disenfranchised due to their linguistic or religious affinity.
He favoured greater autonomy for villages and provinces, and opposed overarching powers for the centre. Further, he argued in favour of equitable distribution of financial resources between the various units of governance.
During the debates on citizenship, Santhanam moved an amendment to define a citizen as ‘Every person born or naturalized in India’.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















