






























Thirumala Rao - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Thirumala Rao


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Thirumala Rao
1901 - 1970




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Telugu
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life:
Thirumala Rao was born on 29th January 1901 in Pithapuram in present-day Andhra Pradesh. An active member of the Congress party, Rao was involved in local politics and was part of several local committees for his party.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
He left his higher education to join the Non-Cooperation Movement, and was jailed several times between 1922 and 1942 for his role in the freedom struggle.
Rao was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly in 1937 and to the Council of States in 1945.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Rao was elected to the Constituent Assembly on a Congress party ticket from the Madras province. He made several interventions in the Assembly, mostly relating to the importance of religion and Mahatma Gandhi in Indian history.
Later Contributions:
Rao was a Member of Parliament from 1950 until 1967. In 1952, he was appointed the Deputy Minister of Food and Agriculture. During his time as an MP, Rao was a member of a number of committees relating to food, agriculture, and transport, and health. He also served as the Lieutenant Governor of the erstwhile Vindhya Pradesh state from 1956.
Rao passed away in 1970.
Key Writings:
He translated Meher Baba’s book ‘God Speaks’ into Telugu.


 



Key Speeches



He argued that although India was a secular state, the Constitution should be used to protect religious and cultural traditions. In this vein, he expressed agreement with an amendment to allow oath-takers to swear ‘in the name of God’.
On several occasions, he lamented that the Constitution did not explicitly acknowledge Mahatma Gandhi’s contributions as the father of the nation.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















