






























IIT-KGP and NUJS Teams Qualify for ConQuest Finals at Eastern Round in Kolkata - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										IIT-KGP and NUJS Teams Qualify for ConQuest Finals at Eastern Round in Kolkata


 



Quiz
IIT-KGP and NUJS Teams Qualify for ConQuest Finals at Eastern Round in Kolkata
The Print team









										17 Aug																			

2019


Quiz



 Venue
Loreto College, Kolkata


Share








The Eastern Regional Round of the ConQuest quiz, organised by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, was held on 17 August 2019 at Kolkata’s Loreto College.

Did you know that ‘Jai Hind’ was a special greeting coined for the Indian National Army? Or that it was a commission headed by Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru that eventually shaped the Constitution of India?
These were among the wide variety of subjects addressed at the eastern regional round of the fourth edition of ConQuest 2019 — India’s premier national quiz on the Constitution, history and politics.

Six teams made the finals — two from IIT-Kharagpur, two from the National University of Juridical Sciences (NUJS), and one each from St Xavier’s College and Jogesh Chandra Chaudhury Law College.
In the end, Team 1 from IIT-Kharagpur emerged the winner, while NUJS’s Team 1 finished second. Both will now travel to Bengaluru for the final round.
A heavy downpour and waterlogged streets failed to drown the students’ enthusiasm, with more than 30 three-member teams taking part in the quiz. Hundreds of students also cheered on their respective colleges and institutions’ teams.
The questions progressively became more difficult with each round, right up to the final buzzer round, but the students were up to the task.

One of the most interesting rounds was called ‘Connect’ — featuring four clues that included images, clips or points. The quizzers had to guess the link between the four. For instance, the teams were asked what links Bangladeshi author Taslima Nasreen’s novel Lajja, author Salman Rushdie, Dutch politician Geert Wilders and the game Pokemon. The correct answer, provided by JCC Law College, was that all of them have had ‘fatwas’ issued against them by fundamentalists.

The quiz-master also had some questions for the audience, and ensured there was never a dull moment.


This post first appeared in ThePrint on 18 August 2019.



Suggested Reading


Affirmative Action in Indian Constitutional History: An Overview






More in events





 Quiz



Students Quizzed on Indian Constitution, History, Politics as Fourth Edition of ConQuest Begins
 St. Joseph's College of Law, Bengaluru



Event Report


10 Aug
2019


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















