






























Upendranath Barman - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Upendranath Barman


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Upendranath Barman
1899 - 1988




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Upendranath Barman was born on 1 December 1899 in Cooch Behar, West Bengal. He graduated from Victoria College, Cooch Behar and then studied law at University Law College, Calcutta.
He practiced law for a few years in Jalpaiguri, West Bengal. He then began his public career as the Vice-Chairman of the Jalpaiguri Municipality.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Barman was a member of the Indian National Congress and was elected to the Bengal Legislative Assembly (1936 to 1945). Barman served as a Minister of the Congress Coalition Cabinet in the state of Bengal (1941 and 1943). Details of his career political career are unknown. 
We know more about this participation in social movements. He experienced caste discrimination as a young adult which inspired him to work for the rights of backward classes. He served as an active member of the Kshatriya Samiti – an organization that advocated for the abolition of the zamindari system.
Barman believed that education was the means by which backward classes could uplift themselves. He was vocal about the need for free and compulsory primary education and served as the President and Vice President of various high schools in Jalpaiguri.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Barman was elected as a member of the Constituent Assembly from West Bengal through a Congress Party ticket. He actively participated in the debates, especially those involving minority rights. 
Later Contributions
In 1948, he represented India at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, London, and the International Rice Commission, Rangoon in 1950. 
Barman died on 7 February 1988.
Key Writings
Barman wrote two books on the Rajbanshi Community: History of the Rajbhanshi Community and History of Rajbhanshi Literature. 


 



Key Speeches



Baman supported Ambedkar’s amendment which stated that the expiry of reservations for Schedule Castes and Schedule Tribes within 10 years of the Constitution of India coming into effect.  
He believed adult franchise would play a key role in the community’s upliftment. 
Barma resisted the claim that the Constitution of India was merely a copy of the Government of India Act 1935 pointing out the Constitution’s provision on universal adult franchise.



 



Resources



Chanchal Adhikary, Upendranath Barman and Caste Politics among the Rajbanshis of North Bengal, 6(2) Voice of Dalit, 2013, pages 137-145 
Upendra Nath Barman: The Rise of a leader from Regional to National Politics 1898 – 1988, Tushar Kanti Barman 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















