






























Article 273: Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part XII

Article
273



Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products

(1) There shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States of Assam, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal, in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in each year of export duty on jute and jute products to those States, such sums as may be prescribed.
(2) The sums so prescribed shall continue to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India so long as any export duty on jute or jute products continues to be levied by the Government of India or until the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution whichever is earlier.
(3) In this article, the expression “prescribed” has the same meaning as in article 270.



 
 

VERSION 1




Draft Article 254, Draft Constitution of India 1948
Notwithstanding anything in article 253 of this Constitution, such proportion, as Parliament may by law determine, of the net proceeds in each year of any export duty on jute or jute-products shall not form part of the revenues of India, but shall be assigned to the States in which jute is grown in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be formulated by such law:
Provided that until Parliament so determine, there shall be assigned to those States out of the net proceeds of the duty in each year such part thereof and in such proportions as may have been fixed in that behalf by any order made under the Government of India Act, 1935, and in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.




VERSION 2


Article 273, Constitution of India 1950
(1) There shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States of Assam, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal, in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in each year of export duty on jute and jute products to those States, such sums as may be prescribed.
⁠(2) The sums so prescribed shall continue to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India so long as any export duty on jute or jute products continues to be levied by the Government of India or until the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution, whichever is earlier.
⁠(3) In this article, the expression “prescribed” has the same meaning as in article 270.




SUMMARY



Draft Article 254 (Article 273, Constitution of India 1950) was discussed on 8 August 1949 in the Constituent Assembly. The Draft Article provided that a portion of the export duty imposed on jute and jute-products by the Union government will be allocated to States in which jute was grown. The percentage and manner of allocation of the export duty to the States were to be determined by Parliament through legislation.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee proposed an amendment to replace the Draft Article to provide that a certain sum of money will be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India every year as aid to Bengal, Bihar, Assam and Orissa instead of assigning a fixed percentage of the export duty on jute and jute products. The President would determine the amount to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and the aid would be given to these States for a maximum time period of 10 years.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee proposed the amendment because he believed export duty was a part of the revenue of the Union government. He acknowledged that some revenue was given to certain State governments under the Government of India Act, 1935 because jute was an important commodity in these regions. However, he stated that the continuation of such an exception would propel other States to demand a similar arrangement for other important commodities and these demands would be detrimental to the interests of the Union government. Instead of abruptly discontinuing this exception which would affect the specific States, he proposed a gradual reduction of allocating Union revenue to these State governments.
A Member argued that the proposed amendment to the Draft Article should include an export duty on tea as well since tea is an important commodity in Assam.
Some Members opposed the amendment on the grounds that it affected the interests of States like Bengal disproportionately. A Member stated that the 10-year limit was arbitrary and it would affect the financial commitments made by certain States based on the revenue to be derived under Draft Article 254. A member proposed that States should be given a greater degree of freedom in determining tax structures.
After heated debate, the Assembly accepted the proposed amendment.
Another member proposed a minor amendment to the amendment proposed by the Chairman of the Drafting Committee – to empower the Parliament to decide the amount to be allocated to certain States instead of the President. This amendment was rejected.
The Draft Article, as amended, was adopted on 8 August 1949.
 



 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















