






























Article 54: Election of President - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
54



Election of President

The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of—
(a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and
(b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
Explanation.—In this article and in article 55, “State” includes the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union territory of Puducherry.



 
 

Version 1




Article 43, Draft Constitution of India 1948
The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of-
(a) The members of both Houses of Parliament, and
(b) The elected members of the Legislatures of the States.




Version 2


Article 54, Constitution of India 1950
The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of —
(a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and
(b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.




Summary


Draft Article 43 was debated on 10 and 13 December 1948. The Draft Article provided for the President to be elected by an electoral college consisting of members of both houses of parliament and elected members of state legislatures.
The core debate on Draft Article 43 revolved around an amendment to base presidential elections on adult franchise; The member who moved the amendment opposed the Draft Article for not sufficiently representing the will of the people. In defence of his proposal, he argued that direct elections were indispensable to ensure that the President was the true representative of the collective sovereignty of people. He argued that his amendment took care to not make the President a ‘creature of party majorities’ and would insulate the President from the ‘vicissitudes of parliamentary fortune‘.
There was strong opposition to this proposal. One member noted that ‘adult citizens’ would even allow Indian citizens who were otherwise disqualified from voting in general elections to participate in presidential elections. Further, it would be inconsistent with the parliamentary form of government which ‘presupposes responsible government’. The elected representatives are entrusted with the government, not citizens themselves. Another member argued that direct elections would make the President a ‘party man’: He/She would be supported by a political party as direct elections would necessitate active campaigning for votes. It was further pointed out that the President was not the ‘real sovereign’: he was analogous to the King of England.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee responded to the proposal and highlighted its practical difficulties. First, he noted that the size of the electorate was too large and would make it extremely difficult to conduct adult franchise based presidential elections. Second, direct elections would pose several administrative issues including inadequate unofficial polling staff, bribery, corruption and election manipulation. Third, since the President in the Indian Constitution was ‘only a figurehead’, it does not necessitate elections based on adult franchise.
The Assembly rejected the proposal and adopted the Draft Article with minor amendments.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















