






























Kameshwar Singh - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Kameshwar Singh


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Kameshwar Singh
1907 - 1962




Key Information

Party: Independent
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Maithili
Education: No Formal Education



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Kameshwar Singh Bahadur was born on 28 November 1907 in Darbhanga, in north Bihar. He succeeded the seat of Raj Darbhanga on the demise of his father, Rameshwar Singh Bahadur. As was the fashion of the time for the aristocratic class, he was tutored at home by an English lady.
The Raj Darbhanga was the largest landed estate in the states of Bihar and Orissa, giving the ruling zamindars a status equivalent to that of the middling princely states. Singh succeeded his father in becoming the biggest landholder in Bihar and Orissa. He was elected as President of the Bengal Landholders Association in August 1929.
 
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Singh was also the President of the British Indian Association in Calcutta. This was one of the early forums for political action among Indians, but thoroughly dominated by the landholding or zamindari class. At the young age of 23, he was invited to attend the Round Table Conferences in London, which discussed the constitutional future of British India.
 
Contribution to Constitution Making
Singh was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bihar as an Independent. He was not an active participant in the debates, but did speak strongly in support of Prime Minister Nehru’s decision to join the Commonwealth. He ardently advocated for equitable compensation to persons who will be negatively affected by the abolition of the zamindari system.
 
Later Contributions
Kameshwar Singh was elected to the Rajya Sabha in 1952 on a Jharkhand Party ticket. He gifted his Anand Bagh Palace to start a Sanskrit university, known today as the Kameshwar Singh Darbhanga Sanskrit University.
Soon after the Constitution came into effect, Singh challenged the Bihar Land Reforms Act, which aimed at dismantling the Zamindari system and instituting land reforms. The Act was declared unconstitutional under Article 14 by the Supreme Court. This judgment was one of the factors that led to the passing of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, which inserted Article 31A into the Constitution, allowing the State to implement its land reform agenda.
Singh also contributed 120,000 acres of land to Acharya Vinoba Bhave’s Bhoodan campaign in 1953.
He passed away on 1 October 1962.
 
Key Writings
Courage and Benevolence: Correspondence and Speeches of India’s Prime-estate Holder Maharajadhiraja Kameshwar Singh (1907-1962)


 



Key Speeches



On 17 May 1949, Kameshwar Singh spoke strongly in favour of ratifying India’s membership of the Commonwealth, arguing that it would not compromise on India’s sovereignty, and that India couldn’t afford to be isolationist in this day and age.
On 12 September 1949, Kameshwar Singh defended the zamindar’s rights to be adequately compensated for the land redistribution programme to be implemented by the State.



 



Resources



The Feudatory and Zemindari India, Vol. 9 No. 1 (East and West Ltd., 1929)
Courage and Benevolence – Correspondence and Speeches of India’s Prime-estate Holder Maharajadhiraja Kameshwar Singh (1907-1962) (Maharajadhiraj Kameshwar Singh Kalyani Foundation, 2007)
Bureaucracy and Control in India’s Great Landed Estates: The Raj Darbhanga of Bihar, 1879 to 1950 by Stephen Henningham (Modern Asian Studies, 1983)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















