






























Finding Bose in the Indian Constitution - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Finding Bose in the Indian Constitution


 
















Finding Bose in the Indian Constitution



Blog



Vineeth Krishna
									 and 									Sudhir Krishnaswamy






26 January 2022

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

Like M.K. Gandhi, Subhas Chandra Bose was not part of the Constituent Assembly that drafted India’s Constitution, but for different reasons. While Gandhi strategically stayed away from the Assembly, Bose had already died in a plane crash. Nevertheless, traces of Bose’s personality and ideas are scattered throughout Indian constitutional history.
The ‘Miscellaneous’ chapter in the original manuscript of the Constitution boasts an impressive sketch of Bose. Predictably, he is in military uniform, leading his Indian National Army (INA) soldiers into battle in mountainous terrain. An excerpt of Bose’s famous 1944 radio address ­– ‘Father of our Nation, in this holy war for India’s liberation, we ask for your blessings and good wishes’ – appears along the sides of the sketch’s rectangular frame.
The Bose family had a more direct presence in the Assembly. His younger brother, Sarat Chandra Bose, was elected from Bengal to the Constituent Assembly on a Congress party ticket. However, he hardly participated in the Assembly’s proceedings and eventually quit in 1947 protesting the partition of Bengal and Punjab.
There is no particular record of Bose’s constitutional imagination unlike B.R. Ambedkar or M.N. Roy who advanced draft constitutional documents like States and Minorities 1945 and Constitution of Free India 1944. No proposal can be traced concretely to Bose. In the Assembly, members invoked Bose primarily praising his contribution to the freedom movement but not to support a concrete constitutional position in the debates.
This Republic Day, as the current government pushes a review of Bose’s political legacy, at least in so far as we unearth, we must concede that the sources of his constitutional ideas are scanty.
Bose’s constitutional position may be discerned from the sharp differences that arose in the 1930s between him and the Congress leadership. Bose attacked the Congress party’s demand for a Constituent Assembly as a ‘stunt’ and argued that the “seizure of power” must precede the creation of a Constituent Assembly.
By casting the Indian Constitution in the French and American revolutionary mode where the revolution preceded the Constitution, Bose stood outside the mainstream political belief. Indian Constitution framers ambitiously proposed that a Constitution would be the vehicle for social, economic and political revolution – the Constitution came first, the revolution after.
This blog post appears in The Print under the title ‘Subhas Chandra Bose’s political ideas were always clear, not his constitutional imagination’.

Tags Subhas Chandra Bose 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















