






























Gauhati Medical College Wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2022 - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Gauhati Medical College Wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2022


 



Quiz
Gauhati Medical College Wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2022
The Print team









										03 Dec																			

2022


Quiz



 Venue
Christ (Deemed to be) University, Bengaluru


Share









The Winners of ConQuest 2022 – Gauhati Medical College
Gauhati Medical College has won the final round of ConQuest2022 quiz competition that concluded in Bengaluru recently.
Sayan Mazumdar, Bishwayan Bhattacharjee and Amritnandini Talukdar remained ahead of the peers from the very beginning during the five rounds of quizzing.
ConQuest, which is promoted by the Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR), aims to facilitate public engagement with the Indian Constitution, history and politics. This is the sixth edition of ConQuest and it was held at the Christ (deemed to be) University in Bengaluru. The varsity is also a partner in the long-running quiz.
ConQuest is supported by the South Regional office of the Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung für die Freiheit.
Jayna Kothari, senior advocate and executive director at CLPR, said the quiz has managed to stir interest in the Constitution not only among those who study law but other courses too.
“That’s really the success for conquest because our aim was really to build some excitement into understanding our Constitution and that excitement should be built not just by us who study law but by everyone,” she said.
The quiz is also an extension of constitutionofindia.net — a digital, open-access resource on India’s constitutional and political history, which includes a digitised, tagged and easily searchable version of the constituent assembly debates.
ConQuest returned after a three-year hiatus owing to the Covid-19 pandemic, with a theme to celebrate India at 75.
The National Finalists of ConQuest 2022
Questions on Mr & Mrs 55, ‘Hyderi Manzil’
Five rounds of intense quizzing in the final competition saw several questions, ranging from constituent assemblies to one on Guru Dutt’s 1950’s Bollywood classic Mr & Mrs 55 for a clue on the Hindu Marriage act.
The National Law University Delhi Team 2, represented by Ananya Giri Upadhya, Ashwin Arun and Siddharth Malik bagged the second place. The National Law School of India University (NLSUI) Bengaluru Team 1, represented by Suvanssh Mahajan, Sunidhi Das and Yash Goyal, bagged the third position.
The last question was on the importance of ‘Hyderi Manzil’ building in Kolkata and NLSIU took their chance in the buzzer round but got the answer wrong. The correct answer is this is where Mahatma Gandhi had stayed on the eve of India’s Independence and organised a fast to bring Hindu-Muslim harmony in West Bengal soon after the Partition.
The finals were a culmination of four regional rounds. Each regional round consisted of a preliminary and a final round that conducted on the same day. The preliminary round consisted of a written test and the six highest scoring teams competed at the regional finals. The top two teams from each regional final round then competed in the national finals.


This report was first published in The Print on Tuesday, 6 December 2022.
ConQuest 2022 is organised by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bengaluru and is supported by the South Regional office of the Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung für die Freiheit.
ThePrint is a digital partner.








More in events





 Quiz



ConQuest: India’s Premier National Quiz on the Indian Constitution, History and Politics
 All over India



Event Report


01 Oct
2016







 Quiz



National Law School of India University Wins South Zone Prelims, Reaches ConQuest 2022 Finals
 St. Joseph's College of Law



Event Report


26 Nov
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















