






























U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 4 at NLSIU, Bangalore (Session III) - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 4 at NLSIU, Bangalore (Session III)


 

















 





Video




 




U.S. – India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 : Workshop 4 at NLSIU, Bangalore (Session III)

January 20, 2022






The Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR) in collaboration with its partnered Indian and American universities organised a series of workshops on U.S.- India Comparative Constitutional law in October, November 2021 and January 2022. The partnered Indian and American law universities were paired for an interactive session.
CLPR conducted the final workshop of the U.S.-India Comparative Constitutional Law 2.0 series between January 18th and 21st, 2022 with the students of National Law School of India University, Bengaluru. An absorbing interactive session with the students of Tulane University School of Law, our U.S. based partner university, was part of the final day of the workshop. Over 30 students from both universities participated in the workshop. They were joined by faculty members from the two universities, U.S. Consulate staff, and members of the CLPR team.
The CLPR team built the workshop around three sessions that explored the federal distribution of power within a U.S.-India comparative constitutional framework. It gave the students an opportunity to think about critical Constitutional Law issues and engage in a vibrant discussion from the U.S. and Indian contexts. This video covers session III of the workshop.
The Agenda for session III is provided below:
7.30 pm – 9.30 pm – Session III: Federal Distribution of Executive Powers
Part I
The final session of the workshop focused on the federal distribution of Executive powers in the U.S. and India. The Indian law students were joined by students and faculty from the Tulane Law School, New Orleans. The CLPR presentation gave the both sets of students an overview of the constitutional provisions pertaining to Executive structure in the U.S. and India. The student discussion that followed revolved around the differences and similarities in the distribution of Executive powers between the Union and the States in the U.S. and India.
Session Readings:

Articles 52, 53, 74, 164 of the Constitution of India, 1950 and Article II of the Constitution of the United States
Excerpts from Sarkaria Commission Report 1987 on Centre-State Relations
Excerpts from Common Interpretation on Article II, constitutioncentre.org
‘The Possibilities of Comparative Constitutional Law’ by Mark Tushnet ( Yale Law Journal, Vol. 108, No. 6 (Apr., 1999), pp. 1225-1309)

Presentation Slides: Session III Part I
Part II
The CLPR team took the students through the ‘Net Neutrality’ debate in the U.S. and the issue of the expanding jurisdiction of the Border Security Force in India and the federal controversies that arose in these cases. With this background, students participated in an activity where they had to design the Indian and U.S. Supreme Courts’ response to a hypothetical conflict between the State and the Union Executives.
Session Readings:

Compilation of Net Neutrality responses by the State by CLPR
Explained: BSF powers and jurisdiction, by Deeptiman Tiwary (Indian Express, October 15 202)
Punjab Moves Supreme Court Over Centre’s Decision to Increase BSF’s Jurisdiction, The Quint (December 12, 2021)

Presentation Slides: Session III Part II
Speaker Remarks
Scott Hartmann, Cultural Affairs Officer, United States Consulate General Chennai, introduced the speaker for the session Professor Mark Tushnet, William Nelson Cromwell Professor of Law, Emeritus, Harvard Law School.
In his remarks, Professor Tushnet argued against the conventional view that the U.S. did not have a ‘President’s Rule’ type constitutional provision like India does. He then compared U.S. and Indian constitutional law and history to show how the grounds to dismiss a State government varied in the two jurisdictions. Students had a chance to interact with Prof Tushnet and ask questions. With this, the session came to a close.
Following the talk, the students were invited to an hour-long essay competition on January 23rd, 2022, on the topic, ‘how should legislative and executive power be distributed between the Centre and the States to respond to a virulent pandemic?’. The top two essayists were invited to the closing ceremony of the workshop series. The CLPR team took feedback from the students and brought the workshop to an end.

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















