






























National Constitution Society Convention | IIHS, Bangalore | Welcome and Introduction - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										National Constitution Society Convention | IIHS, Bangalore | Welcome and Introduction


 

















 





Video




 




National Constitution Society Convention | IIHS, Bangalore | Welcome and Introduction

November 23, 2018






In 2018, the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bangalore (CLPR) initiated a network of Constitution societies in schools and colleges across India to be known as the National Constitution Society (NCS). Through its institutional chapters and a central Society, it looks to critically engage with India’s constitutional inheritance.
In November 2018, CLPR organised a one-day All India National Constitution Society Convention that brought together student delegates from institutions across the country along with academics, lawyers and activists. This one-day event presented Student Delegates with the opportunity to critically engage with the history and contemporary relevance of the Indian Constitution and develop a plan to preserve, protect and promote constitutional values in the 21st century. Towards the end of the Convention, in its Plenary Session, the delegates elected the first Student Board Members for the NCS. This video includes the welcome and introduction of the event by CLPR Executive Director, Jayna Kothari.
Find the Agenda for the event below:
National Constitution Society Convention
at the Indian Institution of Human Settlements, Bangalore
23rd November 2018
08.15 am – 09.00 am: Breakfast
09.00 am – 09.15 am: Welcome and Introduction
09.15 am – 10.15 am: Session I – Why Does Indian Constitutional & Political History Matter?
The Constitution of India, 1950 was shaped by several legal and political processes through the 19th/20th century. This session will assess how an awareness of this long history of the Constitution is critical for a rigorous understanding of our contemporary moment.
Sucheta Mahajan, Professor and Chairperson, Centre for Historical Studies, School of Social Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University
Sudhir Krishnaswamy (Discussant), Managing Trustee, Centre for Law and Policy Research; Professor, Azim Premji University
10.15 am – 11.15 am: Session II – Supreme Court’s Push for Equality
2018 has been the year where equality cases have come the fore in the Supreme Court. This panel will explore the role of social movements and civil society actors who have initiated some key cases and assess how the Court has addressed their concerns.
Hasina Khan, Founder Member, Bebaak Collective
Akkai Padmashali, Founder, Ondede; Transgender Rights Activist
Jayna Kothari (Moderator), Executive Director, Centre for Law and Policy Research; Senior Advocate, Karnataka High Court and Supreme Court of India.
11.15 am – 11.30 am: Tea
11.30 pm – 12.30 pm: Session III – Gender and Sexuality in the Supreme Court
In 2018 the Supreme Court has contended with the tension between the individual right to equality and the rights of religious denominations to manage their religious affairs. This tension was at the core of India’s founding moment and has once again become politically dominant. This panel will explore if the Court has reconciled these tensions appropriately.
Flavia Agnes, Co-Founder, MAJLIS; Women’s Rights Lawyer
Arvind Narrain, Founding Member, Alternative Law Forum; Human Rights Lawyer and Activist
Arun Thiruvengadam (Moderator), Professor, Azim Premji University
12.30pm – 01.30 pm: Session IV – The 21st Century Indian Constitution
The Indian constitution has successfully endured the hurly burly of Indian politics for 7 decades. However, it faces significant challenges from the core and the margins of Indian political life. This panel will explore why a vital and inclusive constitutional culture is essential for the Constitution to survive the 21st Century.
Babloo Loitongbam, Executive Director, Human Rights Alert
Sanjay Jain, Associate Professor, ILS Law College
Sudhir Krishnaswamy (Moderator)
01.30 pm – 02.15 pm: Lunch
02.15 pm – 03.15 pm: Session V – A National Constitution Society for India: The Need for Student Action
Across the world students have been at the forefront of political movements for justice and progressive social change. The Constitution will need to engage young minds and aspirations to endure the 21st Century. This Panel will explore the role of a student culture in deepening the values of liberal constitutionalism in India.
Babu Mathew, Visiting Professor, National Law School of India University; Trade Union Activist
Badrinarayan Seetharaman (Discussant), Co-Founder, Gathr
03:15 pm – 03:45 pm: Tea
03.45 pm – 05.00 pm: Session VI – Organizing a National Constitutional Society: Structure and Agenda
While there have been several initiatives to create student activity to advance constitutional understanding at various academic institutions, there has been no national organization in this field. This panel will explore the relevance of a ‘National Constitutional Society’ and different models of organizational structure and potential agendas for such a society.
Vineeth Krishna, Centre for Law and Policy Research
Kruthika R, Centre for Law and Policy Research
Siddharth Chauhan, Assistant Professor, NALSAR University of Law
05.00 pm – 05.15 pm: Final Remarks and Vote of Thanks
5.15 pm – 5.45 pm: High Tea
05.45 pm – 06.45 pm: Student Delegates Plenary Session
07.15 pm – 09.00 pm: Convention Dinner
 

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















