






























Constitution Day Campaign | Kozhikode | Mock Parliament and Quiz - Constitution of India































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Constitution Day Campaign | Kozhikode | Mock Parliament and Quiz


 



Quiz
Constitution Day Campaign | Kozhikode | Mock Parliament and Quiz
Siddharth Jha









										23 Jan										- 									
24 Jan

2023


Quiz



 Venue
Kozhikode


Share









As we celebrated India’s 74th Republic Day this week, the ConstitutionofIndia.net team took a trip to Kozhikode, for the Constitution Day Campaign activities organised by the District Administration and Government Law College, Kozhikode. Team members helped in conducting a Mock Parliament and quiz for college students and a Mock Parliament training session for senior secondary school students.
The events promoted an understanding of how our parliamentary democracy functions, thereby advancing our larger aim of building a popular constitutional culture. In line with this, all sessions were conducted bilingually in English and Malayalam.
Student Parliamentarians debate Anti-Fake news bill
On 23 January, a Mock Parliament session was held at St. Xavier’s Arts and Science College, Kozhikode. Over 25 students participated in the session, in front of an audience of around 80 students. The event was inaugurated by the District Development Commissioner, Ms. Madhavikutty M. S. She encouraged the students to go beyond a textbook understanding of parliamentary democracy, and to engage with it in a deeper and more meaningful way.
CLPR Associate briefing the student participants
Participants came from a number of colleges, including the hosts St. Xavier’s Arts and Science College, Government Law College, AWH Special College, St. Joseph’s College and Government College, Perambra. The students acted out the various legislative and non-legislative functions conducted in Lok Sabha. These included procedures and devices like Question Hour, Zero Hour and Obituary Reference. The centrepiece was the discussion on the ‘Anti-Fake News Bill’, presented by the Minister of Information and Broadcasting. Opposition members grilled the government for its poor performance and insincerity, but the bill was passed easily with a strong majority.
Next morning, the team headed to Government Ganapath Vocational Higher Secondary School, Feroke, to interact with a vibrant group of high school students from 8th and 9th grades. The students were familiarised with the basics of parliamentary functioning and the purpose of the Mock Parliament.
School students participating in the Mock Parliament session
Students enthusiastically volunteered to get assigned the most important roles such as Speaker, Prime Minister and Leader of Opposition. Their teachers will now train the students further and conduct practice sessions with the translated Mock Parliament transcript, for a final performance towards the end of February.
ConQuest: Kozhikode Edition
The concluding event was a quiz competition for college students, held at Government Arts and Science College, Calicut. A preliminary round had already been conducted online, and six teams from St. Joseph’s College Devagiri, Zamorin’s Guruvayurappan College, SN College Quilandy, Government Arts College Kozhikode, and Government Law College Kozhikode had qualified for the finals.
College students participating in the quiz
Principal of Government Arts and Science College, Dr. Edakkotte Shaji inaugurated the event, appreciating the efforts of the organisers. The structure and questions of the quiz were designed by the ConstitutionofIndia.net team along the lines of our ConQuest quiz, testing the participant’s knowledge of Indian constitutional history and politics. The questions also engaged with contemporary events of importance.
One question required students to recognise the country whose people have recently rejected a progressive, new draft constitution, based on some hints about the document and the young President of the country. Another question talked about the repeal of a regressive law in Singapore, which shared its origins with a similar provision in the Indian penal code.
The team from St. Joseph’s College, Devagiri crushed the competition to come out on top, while the two teams from Government Law College, Kozhikode finished second and third.
The organising team and quiz participants with CLPR Associates
Thanks to the organising team at CLIJEO, Government Law College, Kozhikode and the Kozhikode District Administration for inviting us to their Constitution Day Campaign. We look forward to further collaboration with them. We also hope to continue engaging with universities, student groups, district administrations and state governments across India in our various civic education endeavours.


Resources

Transcript of Mock Parliament
Anti-Fake News Bill




Suggested Reading


Why India’s Vice President is Wrong About Parliamentary Sovereignty



Desk Brief: Why Do Some Union Expenses Not Require Parliament’s Approval?



Article 80: Composition of the Council of States



Article 79: Constitution of Parliament






More in events





 Quiz



ConQuest: India’s Premier National Quiz on the Indian Constitution, History and Politics
 All over India



Event Report


01 Oct
2016







 Quiz



Constitution Day Quiz 2021
 Virtual



Event Report


26 Nov
2021


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















