






























B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya
1880 - 1957




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Chairman: 
The Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces 
Member: Committee on the Rules of ProcedureProvincial Constitution Committee+2 moreSub-Committee II (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee)The Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Bhogaraju Pattabhi Sitaramayya was born on 24th November 1880. He obtained a medical degree from Madras Medical College. Between 1906 and 1916, he set up a practice in Masulipatnam, Andhra Pradesh. 
In 1919, he set up a weekly English publication, the Janmabhumi.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
In 1916, he gave up his medical practice and became involved in the Indian political and freedom movement.  He joined the Congress party and was eventually elected its president in 1948. Sitaramayya took part in the Home Rule movement, Salt Satyagraha, Gandhi’s individual Satyagraha in 1941 and Quit India movement.
Contribution to Constitution Making
He was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras province in 1946 on a Congress party ticket. Sitarammaya was a member of the Constituent Assembly Negotiating Committee which carried out deliberations with the Chamber of Princes to integrate the princely states with India and was successful in including the representatives of these states in the Constituent Assembly. Additionally, he chaired the Committee of Chief Commissioner’s Provinces which made recommendations on the administrative and legislative setup for Delhi that was later adopted by the Constituent Assembly.
Some of his important interventions were in the debates surrounding the privy purse and separate electorates.
Later Contributions
Sitaramayya was appointed as the Governor of Madhya Pradesh from 1952 to 1957.
He passed away on December 17th, 1959.
Key Writings
Popularly referred to as the ‘historian of Indian National Congress’, he has written the History of the Indian National Congress in two volumes (1935 and 1947).  His other writings include Indian Nationalism, The Redistribution of Indian Provinces on a Linguistic Basis, Non-Cooperation, Some Fundamentals Of The Indian Problem, Current history in questions and answers, and Feathers & Stones: My Study Windows.
 


 



Key Speeches



A day before the Constitution was adopted by the Assembly, Sitaramayya responded strongly to critics who claimed that the Constitution was not a revolutionary document.
He defended Privy Purse granted to the princes and noted its significance in securing accession of the Princely States to the Indian union: 
During the discussions on the powers of the Governor, responsible governance, and political parties, he mounted a defense against separate electorates. He narrated the historical demand for separate electorates, and claimed that it would enable the formation of ‘political parties on purely political principles without any communal bias’.



 



Resources



 Pattabhi Sitaramayya, a biography by Mamidipudi Pattabhiram.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















