






























Who Should Get Reservations? - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										Who Should Get Reservations?


 

















 





Video




 




Who Should Get Reservations?

September 26, 2022






The Supreme Court is currently hearing a challenge to the 103rd Amendment Act, which introduced reservations based on economic criteria. Petitioners have argued that our Constitution allows for reservations only on the basis of social or educational backwardness. What did our Constitution Framers think? Watch this video to find out.
Transcript
You may have noticed that issues around reservations have been in the news of late. This was triggered by an on-going case at the Supreme Court which challenges the constitutionality of the 103rd amendment that introduced reservations for Economically Weaker Sections of society. The Court will decide if reservations can be based solely on income.
74 years ago, our Constitution Framers faced similar questions. Who should get reservations?
On 30th November 1948, the Indian Constituent Assembly debated Draft Article 10. This Draft Article allowed the State to reserve government jobs for “…any backward class of citizens, who in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State”.
Many members were surprised and confused about the term ‘backward class’. Did it mean scheduled castes and tribes, women, minorities…who? T.T. Krishnamachari criticised the Draft Article and said that ‘backward classes’ was a vague term.
Drafting Committee Chairman B.R. Ambedkar defended the Draft Article by saying that the term was deliberately vague. He argued that the government of the day should be given the authority to decide who constitutes ‘backward class’.
The Draft was accepted by the Assembly and made it as Article 16 of the Constitution of India 1950.
A year later to the shock of the government of India, the Supreme Court in two separate cases shot down the Madras government’s reservation policies for Scheduled Castes and Tribes, and other non-Brahmin communities. The Nehru government now realised that the lack of clarity around ‘backward classes’ in the Constitution could lead to more instances of the SC striking down reservation policies for marginalised groups.
The Government acted quickly to rectify the situation by introducing the 1st amendment, which allowed the State to make “any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes”
Dr. Ambedkar, who was now the Law Minister in the Union Government, U-turned from his earlier position of keeping ‘backward classes’ vague. He now declared in Parliament that “backward classes are…nothing else but a collection of certain castes”.
Notice that in this whole story, while there was vagueness and later clarity on what backward classes were – no one ever thought that it would mean just ”economically weak’ classes. This is how reservations in India have been implemented: for socially and educationally marginalised groups.
The Supreme Court will now decide if this must change. Our friends at the Supreme Court Observer are closely tracking the developments on the EWS case. Visit their website to read more.

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















