






























Arun Chandra Guha - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Arun Chandra Guha


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Arun Chandra Guha
1892 - 




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Arun Chandra Guha was born on 14 May 1892 in Barisal, Bengal. He graduated from Braja Mohan College. 
An avid writer, he ran a publishing house ‘Saraswati Library’- through which he published his radical writings. He believed his role was to get as many books as possible published. Guha also published Swadhinta (Freedom), a weekly journal that was banned in 1930 – four of its editors were convicted for sedition.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Guha joined the Jugantar Party in 1906 – a clandestine revolutionary party established in Bengal by leaders such as Aurobindo Ghosh, Barin Ghosh, Bhupendranath Datta and Raja Subodh Mallik that strived for Indian independence. He was arrested and detained multiple times for his participation in the political activities of this party.
During his time in prison, he decided to join the non-cooperation movement in 1920. He stated, ‘I felt that a revolution could not be effective by a handful of men organising it secretly. They could act as spearheads but the movement had to be mass-based’. He soon became a part of the West Bengal Pradesh Congress Committee where he was elected as the General Secretary. Subsequently, Guha joined the All-India Congress Committee in 1923, where he continued as a member for 26 years.
He was a member of various social and political organisations including the Shankar Math Trust, Prajnanananda Pathagriha Trust and Maniktala Adarsha Vidyamandir. He also founded the Prajnanananda Jana Seva Sangha. 
Contribution to Constitution Making
Arun Chandra Guha was elected to the Constituent Assembly from West Bengal on a Congress party ticket.
He made important interventions in the debate on re-drafting the Constitution. He gave an extensive closing speech summing up his impressions on the Constitution.
Later Contributions
Arun Chandra Guha was a part of the Provincial Parliament from 1950 to 1952. He was also elected as a member of the first, second and third Lok Sabhas. He served as the Minister of State for Finance during his first term in the Lok Sabha.
He was the Chairman of the Estimates Committee (1965-66) set-up under the aegis of the Ministry of Education. As a part of the Committee, he submitted the 102 Report to the Lok Sabha recommending changes to the functioning of the University Grants Commission and universities in India.


 



Key Speeches



Guha opposed the need to include restrictions on rights and freedoms. He strongly believed that the inclusion of such restrictions would limit future governments from enacting laws related to fundamental rights.
Upholding a Gandhian outlook, Guha wanted to give more power to the village panchayats. He recognised that a powerful Centre is required. He suggested that the same could be achieved if the village panchayat structure is made strong which would inevitably strengthen the Centre through the pyramid structure.
Assessing the Constitution as a whole, he felt that it did not reflect the revolutionary character of the moment, and therefore could only serve as a stopgap arrangement.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















