






























Indian Constitutional History Workshop - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Indian Constitutional History Workshop


 



Workshop
Indian Constitutional History Workshop









										25 Jun																			

2022


Workshop



 Venue
National School of Journalism and Public Discourse, Bangalore


Share








On June 25th 2022, the ConsitutionofIndia.net team at CLPR conducted an ‘Indian Constitutional History’ workshop for students at the National School of Journalism and Public Discourse (NSoJ).

The CLPR team with the students and faculty of NSoJ
The workshop introduced students to the Indian Constitution and its history. It emphasised the relevance of primary materials like the Constituent Assembly Debates and the Historical Constitutions to journalists who report and write about contemporary India.
The Constituent Assembly Debates
The Session began with a video of the England v New Zealand cricket match from the 2019 World Cup, where a dispute arose, requiring the intervention of the umpire. CLPR resource person Vineeth Krishna drew parallels between an umpire who interprets the rule book to decide on an unforeseen dispute to a judge who relies on the Constitution to adjudicate a matter in the Court of law. He explained that a Constitution is akin to a rule book for India— it governs relations between the Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary. It also governs relations between the Centre and the States, the State and the citizen, and the relations between citizens.
The discussion then turned to India’s constitution-making process. Vineeth explained that the Constituent Assembly of India, that comprised around 300 members, meticulously deliberated and drafted the Constitution of India 1950, in 166 sittings between 1946 and 1950. A dramatic portrayal of these debates, in the Rajya Sabha documentary series titled ‘Samvidhan’ was screened to give students a sense of how the Assembly debated a provision of the Constitution. He told the students that all these debates were transcribed and that these could be accessed through sources like the ConstitutionofIndia.net website.
Historical Constitutions
Vineeth asked the students if there was a constitutional imagination before 1946, when the Constituent Assembly began deliberations. They answered that the Indian Constitution relied heavily on the United States and other jurisdictions—that there was little to no history showing a constitutional imagination in India before independence. Contrary to what the students believed, Vineeth pointed out that there was a vibrant constitutional imagination before 1946. He introduced students to documents such as the Constitution of India Bill 1895, Government of India Act 1919 and the Nehru Report 1928, pointing out that many key portions of the Constitution as we know it are inspired by these Historical Constitutions.
CLPR resource person Vineeth introduced the students to Historical Constitutions
Worksheet: Freedom of Speech
Students used ConstitutionofIndia.net to solve a pedagogically designed worksheet on freedom of speech that required them to carefully read primary materials on the site. Through this exercise, students were able to discover and tease out the origins and historical debates around the Constitution’s free speech provisions. A discussion of the worksheet followed, where students shared what they found in these materials. They also weighed in on some of the vexing questions that our Constitution framers had to deal with that included: on what grounds should freedom of speech be restricted?
Students solving the Worksheet
The workshop ended with Vineeth reviewing the day’s learnings and highlighting how a vibrant constitutional culture is critical to sustain and promote India’s constitutional democracy.



Suggested Reading


Article 19: Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of Speech, etc.






More in events





 Workshop



How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?
 Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai



Event Report


17 Sep
2022







 Workshop



Constitution in the Classroom: Sessions with the Students of Amber Valley School
 Amber Valley School, Chikkamagalur



Event Report


10 Jun
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















