






























Gopinath Bordoloi - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Gopinath Bordoloi


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Gopinath Bordoloi
1891 - 1950




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Assam
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Assamese
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Committee on the Rules of ProcedureSub-Committee on the North East Frontier (Assam) Tribal and Excluded Areas 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Gopinath Bordoloi was born on 6th June 1890 in Raha, Assam. He studied Arts at the Scottish Church College, Calcutta, and the University of Calcutta. Bordoloi went on to pursue law and began his legal practice in Guwahati.
In 1936, Bordoloi was elected leader of the opposition in the Assam Legislative Assembly. Two years later, in 1938, he became the Premier (Chief Minister) of Assam. However, after the outbreak of World War II, he and his Cabinet resigned.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Bordoloi joined the Indian National Congress as a volunteer. He actively participated in the Non-Cooperation Movement and was jailed in 1922. After resigning from the post of Chief Minister of Assam in 1939, Bordoloi was jailed twice; he was eventually released in 1944. In the 1946 Assembly elections, he was once again elected as the Premier of Assam.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Bordoloi was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Assam. He intervened in the debates relating to tribal rights, representation in the Lok Sabha, and taxation. 
Later Contributions
Bordoloi was the first Chief Minister of Assam in independent India. He implemented progressive industrial and educational policies and was also responsible for establishing a number of Universities including Gauhati University.
He passed away in 1950 while still in office.  The Governor of Assam (1950-56), Jairamdas Daulatram conferred the title Lokpriya or ‘loved by all’ on Bordoloi.
He was posthumously awarded the Bharat Ratna in 1999 for his work in public affairs. In 2002, a statue of Bordoloi was unveiled in Parliament. 
Key Writings
He wrote several books that included Annasaktiyog, Shreeramachandra, Hajrat Mohammad, and Budhhadeb.


 



Key Speeches



The Assembly discussed taxes levied by the Union on 5 August 1949. During this debate, Bordoloi provided the Assembly with a detailed account of the special financial difficulties faced in Assam. 
While discussing the proportional representation of people in the Lower House, on 18 July 1947, he detailed the changes in the Assamese population due to the rising population and migration and proposed changes to ensure Assam had adequate representation. 
On 6 September 1949, as the Chairman of the North East Frontier Tribal Areas and Assam- Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas Sub-Committee, he appraised the Assembly of the existing tribal situation in Assam.



 



Resources



Lokpriya Gopinath Bordoloi: The Architect of Modern India.
Lokpriya Gopinath Bordoloi. 
Saiyad Saddullar Pora Gopinath Bordoloi Loi.
Gopinath Bordoloi (Builders of Modern India Series) by Birendra Kumar Bhattacharyya.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















