






























Bhagat Singh Hanged, Karachi Resolution Passed - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Bhagat Singh Hanged, Karachi Resolution Passed


 
















Bhagat Singh Hanged, Karachi Resolution Passed



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






23 March 2023

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

In March 1931 thousands of Indians from across the country gathered at the Port city of Karachi. Among them were the leaders of India’s freedom movement, including Jawahar Lal Nehru, Sardar Patel, and Sarojini Naidu who were promptly garlanded and cheered on by a sea of Indians. The atmosphere was festive and energetic.
The Indian National Congress (INC) convened for its 45th session. These sessions were an annual event bringing together the Congress party’s rank and file to take stock of recent political developments and chart out the party’s activities for the next year and beyond. They were usually marked by pomp and fervor. But there was something different at the Karachi session. The mood was not all celebratory. Some sections of the crowd were restless and on the edge. But why?
The Karachi Session was held under the background of seismic political events. To the shock of the Indians, the British executed the revolutionary Bhagat Singh and his associates for their role in the Lahore conspiracy case. This was just a week before the Karachi session. Gandhi had just agreed to a pact with British Viceroy Lord Erwin and suspended the Civil Disobedience Movement in return for political concessions. These developments had angered the more radical and socialist-leaning members of the Congress party and their supporters. The atmosphere at Karachi before the Congress session began was a cocktail of anger, hope, discontent, and excitement.
Image credits: Wikimedia Commons
After all the Congress party leaders arrived, they got to work. They discussed recent political developments and how Congress should respond. At the end of the session, they passed a Resolution on ‘Fundamental Rights and Economic and Social Change’, commonly referred to as the ‘Karachi Resolution’. The Resolution was a three-page document, written in a quasi-legal style. It reiterated the Congress party’s commitment to obtaining ‘Poorna Swaraj’ or complete independence for India. It declared a bouquet of civil rights for Indians, that included free speech, equality, and religious freedom. What made the Resolution stand out and raise eyebrows was its declaration of socio-economic rights for Indians.
The inclusion of such rights was not completely new. The Nehru Report had done so in 1928. However, the Karachi Resolution was different, in that it placed socio-economic rights as central to India’s constitutional and political goals. Also, these rights had a distinct socialist slant. The Resolution declared that ‘To end the exploitation of the masses, political freedom must include the real economic freedom of the starving millions‘. It provided constitutional protection for industrial and agricultural workers and declared that the state must own or control key industries and services.
The Resolution’s strong socialist provisions have been the subject of scholarly attention. Who was behind the socialist provisions in the Resolution? And how did the Congress leadership agree to include these socialist provisions? Professor Kama Maclean in ‘A Revolutionary History of Interwar India’ argues that there is evidence to suggest that the political activist and revolutionary M.N. Roy was behind the socialist provisions. Incidentally, it was M.N. Roy who first mooted the idea of an Indian Constituent Assembly. We also learn from Professor Kama Maclean that the Congress adopted the socialist-heavy Resolution to mollify Nehru and the other left-leaning Congress members in the wake of Bhagat Singh’s execution and to also obtain their support for the Gandhi-Irwin Pact.
The Karachi Resolution marked a turning point in how Indian political actors viewed the constitutional future of India. The Resolution declared, loud and clear, that a future Constitution of India could not simply provide for civil rights and remain silent on the socio-economic conditions of Indians.

Tags Indian Independence MovementIndian National CongressPurna SwarajKarachi Resolution 1931 








Suggested Reading


The Karachi Resolution 1931: Interview with Prof. Kama Maclean



Our Independence Movement Constitution



Our Independence Movement Constitution










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts









												• By 




 0 mins										




 

Ladakh’s Sixth Schedule Demand

25 February 2023
												• By Varsha Nair

Ladakh has been witnessing huge protests demanding constitutional safeguards for the region under the Sixth Schedule. We examine if this demand is legitimate. 


 3 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















