






























Venkatesh Narayan Tivary - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Venkatesh Narayan Tivary


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Venkatesh Narayan Tivary
1890 - 1965




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography


 





Biography


Early Life
Venkatesh Narayan Tivary was born at Kanpur in 1890. He was a journalist who did famine relief work in various parts of North India. He also worked towards providing relief to martial law victims in Punjab.
As a journalist, he worked as the editor for a Hindi weekly ‘Abhyudaya’ (1914-1919 and 1933-1934) and as the editor of two Hindi newspapers named ‘Maryada’ (1914-1919) and ‘Bharat’ (1928-1930).
Role in Indian Independence Movement
Tivary played a vital role in the Indian struggle for independence. He was imprisoned multiple times for participating in various Congress movements against the British Raj.
He was a member of multiple civil society organisations such as the Servants of India Society (1910-1930) and the All India Sewa Samiti, Allahabad.
Tivary also had an active political life. He was the General Secretary of the Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee (1914-1919), member of the UP Legislative Council (1927-1930) and a member of the UP Legislative Assembly (1937 and 1946). He was also the Parliamentary Secretary to the Premier of Uttar Pradesh (1937-1939).
Contributions to Constitution Making
Tivary was elected to the Assembly from the United Provinces through a Congress Party ticket. He was not an active participant in the Assembly debates.
Later Contributions
Tivary served as a member of the Police Reorganisation Committee, Public Health and Medical Reorganisation Committee of the Government of Uttar Pradesh. He also was a part of the Criminal Tribes Act Enquiry Committee of the Government of India, which submitted its report in 1951.
Tivary was also elected to the first Lok Sabha of India on a Congress Party ticket from Kanpur cum Farrukhabad constituency.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















