






























Ladakh's Sixth Schedule Demand - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Ladakh’s Sixth Schedule Demand


 
















Ladakh’s Sixth Schedule Demand



Blog



Varsha Nair






25 February 2023

Share









 
On 26 January 2023, as India celebrated her 74th Republic Day, Sonam Wangchuk, the popular engineer and educationist from Ladakh began a five-day climate fast at Khardung La near Leh. While protection of the fragile Himalayan region seemed to be the focal point of the protest, demands of constitutional safeguards for Ladakh under the Sixth Schedule were synchronous.
This demand is not new. Since the repeal of Article 370 and the creation of Ladakh’s union territory status, there have been continuous cries for both granting it statehood and including it within the Sixth Schedule. In December 2021, Ladakh MP Jamyang Tsering Namgyal spoke in the Lok Sabha in favour of Ladakh’s sixth schedule status to secure the land, employment and cultural identity of Ladakh and its people.
Does Ladakh have a legitimate claim to Sixth Schedule status?
The administration and governance of tribal areas in India are anchored by the Fifth and Sixth Schedules of the Constitution. The Sixth Schedule exclusively controls the administration of tribal areas in the North Eastern states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. The Fifth does so for tribal areas in the rest of India. Protections under the Sixth however are significantly stronger providing for self-governance to tribal communities through the creation of District and Regional Councils that have significant legislative and executive authority with considerable powers.
In the Constituent Assembly, many members expressed their concerns with the Sixth Schedule. They feared that the Schedule would keep the tribal areas perpetually isolated. Assembly member Kuladhar Chaliha claimed that these autonomous councils would further intensify existing separatist tendencies and would be a threat to the functioning of a stable government.
Coming in support of the Sixth Schedule Gopinath Bordoloi, the Chairman of the Committee that Drafted the Sixth Schedule, defended it by arguing that many Hill Tribes in the North East were posturing towards complete independence. He suggested that the Sixth Schedule was the best way to integrate these communities into the Union by giving them some level of autonomy. J.J.M Nichols Roy, an influential figure in the creation of the Sixth Schedule, also supported the Schedule as an appropriate middle ground highlighting that legislative and executive powers of the autonomous councils were subject to the authority of the Governor. The Assembly finally adopted the Sixth Schedule into the Constitution.
From the debates and the text of the Sixth Schedule, it appears that a region was considered candidate for Sixth Schedule protection based on the following criteria. First, it should be a North Eastern Hill Tribe with a distinctive culture that needs special protections.The Ladakh claim falls short here as it isn’t a North Eastern state, even though it does have a unique tribal culture that possibly requires protection. But those from the region have attempted to show similarities with the North Eastern tribes.
The second criteria appears to the existence of an intention to secede. This isn’t the case with Ladakh. But considering that Ladakh has never had exclusive representative government, there seems to be a sense of disaffection even in the absence of a secession claim. Earlier it was part of the Jammu and Kashmir State, with some representation in the State’s Assembly. But with the revoking of Article 370, and its transformation into a Union territory, Ladakh lost this as well.
This probably explains why Ladakh has opted for the Sixth Schedule route. Although the concerns about protecting the tribal region could be addressed through the Fifth Schedule, Ladakh’s lack of statehood, its Union Territory status, the absence of representative government institutions, combined with rapid development and extensive tourism, have compelled many people in Ladkah to view the Sixth Schedule as the only way to protect their interersts.

Tags LadakhSixth Schedule 








Suggested Reading


The Karachi Resolution 1931 with Prof. Kama Maclean



Should Courts Review Delimitation?



Should Courts Review Delimitation?










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

5 Essential Writings on Constitution Making

07 September 2022
												• By Editorial Team

Here we highlight 5 works in the field of constitution making that help readers to understand the processes involved in this field.


 3 mins										




 

Chileans Overwhelmingly Reject a New Progressive Constitution

12 September 2022
												• By Vineeth Krishna

In September 2022, the Chilean population voted to reject the Draft of a new Chilean Constitution. What does the rejection of a highly progressive draft constitution mean for future constitution-making projects?


 4 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















