






























Khandubhai Kasanji Desai - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Khandubhai Kasanji Desai


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Khandubhai Kasanji Desai
1898 - 1975




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Gujarati
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early life
Khandubhai Kasanji Desai was born on 23 October 1898 in Bulsar, Gujarat. He studied at the Bhai Avabai High School, Bulsar and enrolled in Wilson College, Bombay (1920). He discontinued his education at Wilson College on Gandhi’s call to boycott schools and colleges as a part of the Non-Cooperation Movement.
He later resumed his studies at the Gujarat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad – a university established by Gandhi. After graduating, Desai worked as a Headmaster at the National School, Bombay.
He had a keen interest in finance, economics and labour relations.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Desai joined the Independence Movement at a young age. During the non-cooperation movement, he got the opportunity to interact with Shankarlal Banker – an associate of Gandhi. Banker inspired him to join the textile labour movement led by Gulzarilal Nanda – an activist and economist who worked on labour issues.
Desai was a member of the Indian National Congress (1934 – 52). He served in the Ahmedabad Municipality (1935 – 49). He was elected to the Bombay Legislative Assembly twice (1937 – 39 and 1946 – 50).
He became the Secretary of the Textile Labour Association and went on to be elected as its General Secretary as well. As a leader of the textile labour movement, he stressed on the importance of personality development of labourers to improve their socio-political position. He believed that this would reduce the chances of industrial and feudal institutions to exploit labourers.
His work and expertise around labour issues was recognised and earned him appointments to various government committees such as Textile Enquiry Committee, Bombay (1938 – 39), Profit Sharing Committee (1949 – 50) and Fair Wage Enquiry Committee.
Three months before Indian independence, he co-founded the Indian National Trade Union Congress – the Congress Party’s trade union wing. He became its first General Secretary (1947 – 52) and eventually its President (1949 – 52).
Contribution to Constitution Making
Desai was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bombay Presidency on a Congress party ticket. He was not an active participant in the Assembly and made only two substantive speeches.
Later Contributions
Desai led the Indian contingent at the International Labour Organisation in 1950. He was elected to the first Lok Sabha in 1952 and served as India’s third Labour Minister (1954 – 57). He introduced policies that protected Indian labour interests which included lay-off benefits.
Desai then became a member of the Rajya Sabha (1959 – 1966). Two years later, he was appointed as the Governor of Andhra Pradesh (1968 – 1975).
He passed away on 17 April 1975.


 



Key Speeches



Desai supported the then Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru’s decision to join the Commonwealth of Nations. He stated that the masses of the country welcomed the decision in light of promoting world peace without losing sovereignty.
During the third reading of the Constitution, he argued that high salaries and emoluments guaranteed to constitutional authorities could threaten India’s public funds.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















