






























Deshbandhu Gupta - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Deshbandhu Gupta


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Deshbandhu Gupta
1901 - 1951




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Delhi
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: The Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Rati Ram Gupta was born on 14 June 1901 in Panipat. He was given the title ‘Deshbandhu’ by MK Gandhi and Swami Shradhanand.
He completed his early education at a Madrasa in Panipat and then went on to study at St. Stephens College. Here he met with and joined various revolutionary leaders. He actively campaigned for the separation of Haryana and Punjab. He also spoke about the upliftment of Dalits and the removal of untouchability.
Gupta was elected to the Punjab Legislative Assembly where he served for seven years.
Role in India’s independence movement
Gupta was an active member of the Arya Samaj. The Jallianwala Bagh Massacre (1919) had a huge impact on him and the incident drove him to become more actively involved in the freedom struggle. He joined the Indian National Congress (INC) and was responsible for organizing Congress committees in Karnal.
Gupta took an active part in the ‘Quit India’ movement. He was arrested by the British for his involvement in various freedom struggles.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Gupta was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Delhi through a Congress ticket. Gupta believed passionately in the importance of newspapers and other forms of print media and made pertinent arguments in their favour. He pushed strongly for Delhi to have more representation in the Parliament.
Later Contributions
Gupta made vital contributions to Indian journalism. Along with other senior members of the INC, Swami Shraddhanand and Gupta started a newspaper called the Rozana Tej. He expanded this newspaper by buying another publication: The Indian News Chronicle. He also began working with Ramnath Goenka. After his death in 1951, Ramnath Goenka renamed the newspaper as the Indian Express.


 



Key Speeches



Gupta argued for the increase of representation of Delhi in the Parliament. He presented figures depicting Delhi’s exponential population growth and contended that the number of representatives from Delhi should be increased.
He outlined the importance of newspapers in shining light on the happenings of a country. He believed that levying unnecessary taxes on newspapers will pose a hindrance to the very purpose that newspapers serve.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















