






























Desk Brief: Independent India's First Budget - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Independent India’s First Budget


 
















Desk Brief: Independent India’s First Budget



Blog



Editorial Team






03 February 2022

Share









 
On 26 November 1947 a tall man, impeccably dressed in a suit, carrying a leather briefcase, posed for the cameras in a rather stoic fashion. He then walked into the Parliament building to make history. R K Shanmukham Chetty, India’s first Finance Minister, was familiar with all the faces in Parliament that day. The last time he saw them all together was on 30 August that year – when the Constituent Assembly last met. Now in November, the Assembly was acting as India’s legislature.
Chetty hardly spoke in the Constituent Assembly since its first session in December 1946. But silence was not an option today – he was going to present independent India’s first budget. He stood up and said:
‘I rise to present the first Budget of a free and independent India. This occasion may well be considered an historic one and I count it a rare privilege that it has fallen to me to be the Finance Minister to present this Budget. while I am conscious of the honour that is implied in this position, I am even more conscious of the responsibilities that face the custodian of the finances of India at this critical juncture…’
He then swiftly addressed the elephant in the room: ‘Whatever might be the immediate political justification of partition, its economic consequences must be fully appreciated if the two dominions are to safeguard the interests of the ordinary man in both new States’. Strikingly, Chetty went on to suggest that the economic prosperity of India and Pakistan were linked and argued for economic cooperation and integration taking into account the strengths and weakness of both countries.
Chetty went on to provide a tour de force of India’s economic situation and presented his financial plan. The budget, he said, was an interim one and covered seven and a half months starting from 15 August 1947 up until 31 March 1948. The target budget revenue was Rs. 171.5 crore, the revenue expenditure stood at Rs. 197 crore and the fiscal deficit was Rs. 26 crores.
Budget priorities mirrored India’s political and economic predicament at the time. Large portions were allocated to partition related relief and rehabilitation, defence and self-sufficiency in food grain. A whopping 47% of the total budget was allocated for defence expenditure.
Public reaction to the budget appeared measured and unpolarised. One newspaper cheekily titled their front-page report ‘Free India’s First Budget: ‘No Surprises‘ since Chetty stated in his speech that there would be no surprises associated with the budget. It appears that Chetty convincingly assuaged concerns that India wasn’t heading towards bankruptcy – and that was enough. The days of blockbuster budgets hadn’t arrived yet.
Chetty was the Finance Minister for a short period, and his tenure ended with controversy. It was alleged that he did not investigate certain mill owners who were suspected of evading tax. There seem to be two accounts of this controversy: the first argues that Chetty decided not to go after the mill owners by his own accord, the second suggests that Patel influenced Chetty. Eventually, Nehru forced Chetty to hand in his papers, bringing Chetty the unfortunate distinctionof being the first minister in independent India who was made to resign.

Tags Union BudgetR K Shanmukham ChettyIndependent India 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















