






























Algu Rai Shastri - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Algu Rai Shastri


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Algu Rai Shastri
1900 - 1967




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Algu Rai Shastri was born in a village in Mau district in present day Uttar Pradesh on 29 January 1900. After completing his schooling in the Mission School in Varanasi, he graduated from Kashi Vidyapith University.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Even before his graduation, Shastri participated in the Non-Cooperation Movement in 1920, for which he went to jail.
Shastri had an active political career, He served as the Secretary of the Meerut District Congress Committee (1928-1930), Secretary of the Delhi Provincial Congress Committee (1930-1933) and Member of the Legislative Assembly of United Provinces (1937-1952). He remained a member of the All-India Congress Committee since 1928.
Shastri was also a devoted member of the Arya Samaj. He made an effort to combine socialist principles with the Arya Samaj creed. He was one of the key members of the Samaj in Meerut district in particular, and western UP generally. As time went by, his views began to shift from Gandhian socialism towards militant Hindu assertion.
Contribution to Constitution Making
He was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 from the United Provinces. He urged the need to adopt Hindi as a national language and adopt the Constitution of India in Hindi. He also wanted amendments to the Draft Constitution to be tabled in Hindi in the Assembly.
Shastri denounced the reliance on the Government of India Act 1935, stating: “It is, therefore, not proper for us to follow the Government of India Act, 1935, or take it as a Bible. But we find today that it is now actually being followed as a Bible.”
He spoke on the emergency powers of the President of India and Governors, delimitation of constituencies, and restrictions on fundamental rights.
Later Contributions
Shashtri played an active political, legislative and administrative role in independent India. He was elected to the first Lok Sabha in 1952. Shastri was on the Rules Committee of the Lok Sabha, Executive and Finance Committees and Planning Advisory Committee. He served as the President of the Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee in 1951.
He was a Member of Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
Shastri passed away on 12 February 1967.


 



Key Speeches



Addressing the Constituent Assembly in Hindi, Shastri stated that promises of “social and economic equality to all visualises a purely democratic State with the people’s Government.” He emphasised that an ideal state should not discriminate between the ruler and the ruled.
Supporting a clause proposed by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel against recognition of forced religious conversion, Shastri stated that forced conversion without informed consent is improper.
He strongly advocated for restrictions on fundamental rights. He said freedom must be accompanied by responsibility. Since restrictions may imposed by representatives of the people, Shastri believed that reasonable restrictions will be imposed.
Shastri discussed the importance of the right to vote to citizenship and therefore urged for discussion on delimitation of constituencies.
Departing from the Government of India Act, 1935, he emphasised on the need to provide governors of various states emergency powers similar to the President of India.



 



Resources



Algu Rai Shastri: The socialist who vociferously denounced English as a foreign language (The Print, 2018)
Hindu Nationalism and the Language of Politics in Late Colonial India, by William Gould (Cambridge University Press, 2004)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















