






























This Month in Constitution Making (May 1949): India Decides to Remain in the Commonwealth of Nations - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										This Month in Constitution Making (May 1949): India Decides to Remain in the Commonwealth of Nations


 
















This Month in Constitution Making (May 1949): India Decides to Remain in the Commonwealth of Nations



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






04 May 2022

Share









 
									Queen Elizabeth II with the Prime Ministers of the Commonwealth in 1960. 
Image credit: Wikimedia Commons								

On 16 May 1949, Jawaharlal Nehru, moved a motion in the Constituent Assembly, asking his fellow Constitution framers to ratify the Indian government’s decision to remain in the Commonwealth of Nations. To many in the Assembly, this would have come as a surprise. It was Nehru who, while introducing the Objectives Resolution, declared with great emotion that India would be a sovereign republic. This was in effect a rejection of dominion status in favour of complete independence, and also implied the severing of India’s ties with the Commonwealth. So, most expected that India would discontinue its Commonwealth membership.
Yet behind the scenes, Nehru’s attitude towards the Commonwealth was slowly evolving. He began to believe that Commonwealth membership would bring political and economic benefits to India. Specifically, it would ensure close ties with England – still India’s largest trading partner.
In 1949, Nehru attended the Commonwealth Prime Minister’s Conference, where he told other Prime Ministers that India would like to remain a member of the Commonwealth even though it had declared itself as a republic. The Conference after much deliberation accepted this arrangement.
Nehru had to now get the Assembly to ratify India’s decision to remain in the Commonwealth. In his speech moving the ratification motion, Nehru anticipated criticism. He emphasized that India’s membership had no bearing on the country’s independence and suggested why this was beneficial: to maintain and develop friendly relations with the Commonwealth nations. Many Assembly members, however, were not convinced.
Shibban Saxena suggested that Commonwealth membership was akin to dominion status. He reminded the Assembly that Nehru and Congress had for many years vigorously opposed dominion status for India. Further, he was concerned that India’s membership implied that it was part of the ‘Anglo-American’ power bloc which would constrain India’s foreign policy going forward.
H.V. Kamath brought the Assembly’s attention to the novelty of India’s proposed Commonwealth membership: ‘It is a new development, may I say, in political theory, this association of an independent Republic with the Commonwealth of Nations, which has a king at its head.’ He preferred that India adopt the approach that Ireland was considering: India should not join the Commonwealth but recognize and confirm the existence of a special relationship between the various Commonwealth nations. Kamath rejected the argument that the lack of Commonwealth membership was the same as living in isolation.
Not all members were critical of Nehru’s motion. Ananthsayanam Ayyanagar viewed India’s Commonwealth membership as India’s legitimate desire to maintain and further friendly relations with nations. Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar said that India’s membership of the Commonwealth was not a divergence from the Assembly’s idea of India being ‘a Sovereign Independent Republic, both in her internal affairs and external relations.’ Ayyar was joined by Frank Anthony in arguing that India’s economic and military interests were served by having a cordial relationship with Britain, and a Commonwealth membership could serve this purpose.
Nehru responded to his critics in his closing remarks. In a long speech, he suggested that the opposition to India’s membership arose out of a place of bitterness towards the British and India’s experience of British colonialism. He argued that things were different now – ‘the world has changed; England has changed; Europe has changed; India has changed; everything has changed and is changing….’
In the end, the Assembly adopted the motion that Nehru had proposed. India would continue to be a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. Never before did a country declare itself as a republic and continue, or was allowed to continue, to be a member of the Commonwealth.

Tags Indian Constituent AssemblyCommonwealth Group of Nations 














Comments







  capt y.s kulkarni 



								20 April 2023							




thanks for the information

Reply 









Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















