






























T.T Krishnamachari - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										T.T Krishnamachari


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
T.T Krishnamachari
1899 - 1974




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Tiruvallur Thattai Krishnamachari was born on 26 November 1899 to a Madras High Court judge. He received his education from Madras University. In 1928, he set up TTK Company Ltd., an indenting agency. A few years later, he joined politics full-time and left the company’s affairs to his sons.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Krishnamachari became a member of the Madras Legislative Assembly in 1937 and of the Central Legislative Assembly in 1942.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Krishnamachari was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras on a Congress Party ticket. As a member of the Drafting Committee, he dedicated 4014 hours in numerous assignments of the Committee. In the Assembly, he intervened on the issues of freedom of speech and emergency provisions, among others.
Later Contributions:
Krishnamachari was the Central Minister for Iron and Steel between 1955 and 1957. Later, he served briefly as the Finance Minister in 1956. During his tenure, he brought in key tax reforms; he introduced taxes on capital gains, wealth, estate and expenditure. Amidst the Mundhra corruption scandal, he resigned in 1958. But in 1963, he was recalled to Nehru’s cabinet and served as the Finance Minister for two years.
He played a crucial role in the setting up of financial organizations including Industrial Development Bank of India and Unit Trust of India.
He passed away on 7 March 1974 leaving behind three sons.
Key Writings:
In 1954, Krishnamachari authored his memoir ‘Parliamentary Life during 1929-54‘, as a part of the Silver Jubilee Commemoration Volume published by Lok Sabha Secretariat.


 



Key Speeches



Krishnamachari wanted to include ‘contempt of court’ as a restriction to freedom of speech and expression.
He argued against inclusion of Devadasi in Article 23. Instead he insisted that the social practices must be tackled through legislative reforms and public mobilization.
Responding to criticism on emergency provisions, he pointed out that these provisions are crucial in protecting the constitution against future misuse of power.



 



Resources



TT Krishnamachari’s interview
‘India’s Industrialists’



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















