






























Knockout Rounds of Fifth Edition of ConQuest Begin, Four Teams Qualify for Grand Finale - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Knockout Rounds of Fifth Edition of ConQuest Begin, Four Teams Qualify for Grand Finale


 



Quiz
Knockout Rounds of Fifth Edition of ConQuest Begin, Four Teams Qualify for Grand Finale
The Print team









										10 Oct										- 									
11 Oct

2020


Quiz



 Venue
Virtual


Share









The fifth edition of ConQuest, India’s premier national quiz on the Constitution, history, constitutional law and politics, is taking place online. The quiz is an initiative by the Centre for Law & Policy Research (CLPR).
Two out of four knockout rounds were conducted on 10-11 October, with 16 teams participating. Four teams — Delhi University’s St. Stephen’s College and Hindu College, one team from West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences and one from Symbiosis Law School — claimed spots in the grand finale to be held on 25 October.
More than 180 three-member teams from across disciplines had participated in the preliminary rounds held on 3-4 October.
Mixed bag of questions, some multiple-choice
The knockouts were structured into three types of rounds — ‘Potpourri’, ‘List It!’ and ‘Kahoot’, with the latter two focusing on multiple-choice questions.
Teams stumbled on a question that showed four pictures. A hut, a green and white flag with an arrow, B.R. Ambedkar and a poster of the 2011 film Miley Naa Miley Hum were displayed on a screen and teams had to find the connection between them. Many guessed Chirag Paswan and the Lok Janshakti Party, due to the movie poster from the LJP leader’s acting days and the green and white flag of the party. However, the specific answer was Ram Vilas Paswan who was also an Ambedkarite and a legislator from the Samyukta Socialist Party, denoted by the symbol of a hut.
In ‘List It!’, teams were shown a grid of nine answers to a question, six of which were correct. They had to pick the right answers in under a minute — 500 points for every correct pick and zero points if even one was wrong. St. Stephen’s, for example, was asked to pick ‘Items on the Concurrent List’, out of options like factories, bankruptcy, fisheries, labour disputes, electricity, newspapers and printing press. They chose tolls, an incorrect pick that led a quiz facilitator to quip, “Looks like that took a toll on them.”
Many participants were stumped when presented with pictures of two unnamed statesmen (K.M. Munshi and Gopalaswamy Ayyangar) who came up with a formula in 1949. Teams were then asked to identify what decision was made using the formula that ended up forming the basis for a part of the Constitution. Only St. Stephen’s correctly identified it as the official languages of the Union.
The Munshi-Ayyangar formula — named after constituent assembly members K.M. Munshi and N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar — emerged amid heated debates in the Constituent Assembly on the issue of a national language. The assembly eventually came to a compromise by adopting a formula that defined the official languages of the Union and made no mention of a national language for India.
Almost all teams correctly identified Bilkis from Shaheen Bagh as the Indian, representing a certain location, who was featured in TIME Magazine’s list of ‘100 Most Influential People of 2020’. All teams also nailed their task to arrange four movements led by Mahatma Gandhi — Champaran Satyagraha, Non-Cooperation Movement, Quit India Movement and Salt Satyagraha — in chronological order.
The teams that made it
The eight teams that participated in the first knockout included the National University of Study and Research in Law, Ranchi; a team from West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences; Shaheed Bhagat Singh College, New Delhi; St Stephen’s, New Delhi; and one team each from Symbiosis Law School, Pune, the National Law Institute University, Bhopal, the National Law School of India University, Bengaluru and NALSAR, Hyderabad.
The two teams that qualified were Delhi’s St. Stephen’s, with 14,377 points, and West Bengal’s NUJS, with 12,457 points.
The eight teams that took part in the second knockout included one from West Bengal’s NUJS; Chanakya National Law University, Patna; University School of Law and Legal Studies, New Delhi; Hindu College, New Delhi; a team from Symbiosis Law School, Pune; Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; The Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Hyderabad and St Joseph’s College (Autonomous).
The two teams that qualified were Symbiosis Law School, with 12,052 points, and Hindu College, with 10,691 points.


This article first appeared in ThePrint.








More in events





 Quiz



Mumbai’s Government Law College wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2020
 Virtual



Event Report


25 Oct
2020







 Quiz



Four More Teams Qualify, Stage is Set for ConQuest Grand Finale on 25 October
 Virtual



Event Report


17 Oct
2020


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















