






























N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar
1882 - 1953




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Committee on the Rules of ProcedureThe Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Narasimha Gopalaswami Ayyangar was born on 31 March 1882 in Tanjore, Madras. He studied at the Wesley School and later at Presidency College, Madras. In 1905, he joined the Madras Civil Service and served in several posts including District Collector and Member of the Board of Revenue.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Ayyangar made a name for himself as an able administrator. His contribution to politics started with his appointment as the Prime Minister of Kashmir in 1937, just after his retirement from the Madras Civil Services. Apart from his interest in education, industry and rural development, he is also remembered for his reforms in the Forest Department and the tourism industry of Kashmir.
Ayyangar was elected to the Council of States in 1943, where he served until 1947. During his term, he was the Chairman of the ‘Committee for the Indianization of Army’ and co-authored the Sapru Committee Report on constitutional reforms.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ayyangar was elected to the Constituent Assembly by the Madras Assembly. He was part of the seven-member Drafting Committee, making him one of the key architects of the Indian Constitution. He was also charged with drafting Article 370, which defined the special relationship of the state of Jammu and Kashmir with the Indian Union.
Later Contributions
Ayyangar served as a minister without any specific portfolio in Jawaharlal Nehru’s cabinet between 1947-48. In 1948, he headed the delegation that presented India’s case at the United Nations in the persistent dispute over Kashmir.
Under his leadership as the Minister for Railways and Transport from 1948 to 1952, the Indian Railways experienced remarkable growth and development in services and equipment. The regrouping of the Indian Railways into six zonal systems was his brainchild leading to the Railways reporting surplus earnings at this time.
The final post held by him was that of Defence Minister from 1952-1953. In 1952, he was appointed India’s representative in the ongoing negotiations and discussions on Kashmir at the Geneva talks.
Ayyangar died in Madras on February 10, 1953 at the age of 71.
Key Writings
Ayyangar’s key publication was the “Report on Reorganization of the Government Machinery“, published in 1949. It contributed to the formation of the Defence Committee, the Economic Committee, the Parliamentary and Legal Affairs Committee, and the Ad Hoc Administrative Organization Committee by the Union Government.


 



Key Speeches



Gopalaswami Ayyangar explained the provision of the promulgation of ordinances by the President when the Parliament is in the recess to the Constituent Assembly. He also moved the provision of the establishment of the Supreme Court.
He also participated in deliberations on the status and applicable of certain Articles in the Constitution to the state of Kashmir.
He made important interventions while deliberating on the nature of a federation, and the power dynamic and its distribution between the centre and the state.
His most important intervention was to elaborate on the status of Kashmir and suggested that Kashmir be called Jammu & Kashmir as he felt this name represented the state better.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















