






























The Tamil Nadu Governor and Constitutional Conventions - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										The Tamil Nadu Governor and Constitutional Conventions


 
















The Tamil Nadu Governor and Constitutional Conventions



Blog



Siddharth Jha






25 February 2023

Share









 
									Governor R.N. Ravi addressing the Tamil Nadu legislature


Image Credits: The Hindu								

On 9 January 2023, the Governor of Tamil Nadu chose to skip certain portions of the speech prepared by the state government, while addressing the first session of the Legislative Assembly in the new year. The skipped portion included references to values like social justice and secularism, and the names of leaders like Periyar and Ambedkar. This kicked off a huge political row, with the ruling party in Tamil Nadu alleging a serious breach of “convention”.
What are these conventions, and why are they so important?
As the name suggests, conventions are long-standing practices or norms which are not legally enforceable, but are accepted by all parties. In the case of unwritten constitutions like that of the United Kingdom, the most basic elements of parliamentary democracy such as confidence of the majority and collective responsibility are backed only by the force of convention. Conventions can be as important as codified law, as long as there is political consensus to honour them.
Queen Elizabeth II arriving in Parliament to deliver her speech Image Credits: BBC
India adopted the Westminster form of parliamentary government as well, along with its recognised conventions. Some conventions, such as that of collective responsibility, were explicitly mentioned and codified. Others, such as the President or Governor being bound to follow the advice of the Council of Ministers, have been left uncodified. In 1971, the Supreme Court clarified that the conventions of parliamentary government must be kept in mind while interpreting the Constitution.
The Governor’s address is adopted from one such convention. It is analogous to the ‘Speech from the Throne’ in the United Kingdom, where the monarch delivers a speech prepared by the Cabinet at the beginning of every session, outlining the legislative agenda of the government. Our Constitution codified this convention through Articles 87 and 176, directing the President or Governor to address both houses of the legislature together at the beginning of each year or after a general election.
Now, the Constitution does not go into the specifics of the content of this address. Conventionally, the speech is prepared by the Council of Ministers, outlining the legislative and policy intent of the government for the coming year. Presidents and Governors are not supposed to deviate from the text provided as per convention, though they have done so at times.
By skipping an entire section of the speech, the Governor of Tamil Nadu has broken this convention. The controversy foregrounds the already existing tensions between the Governor and the executive in Tamil Nadu. In November 2022, MPs from the state had even petitioned the President to remove the Governor, accusing him of deliberately delaying legislation and opposing a popularly elected government.
The breaking of constitutional conventions can trigger a number of negative effects. It can undermine the very idea of these conventions, encouraging constitutional actors across the spectrum to not follow them. This in turn can lead to erosion of inter-institutional trust, promote conflicts that interrupt with the smooth functioning of government, and stall policy implementation — as is evident in the case of Tamil Nadu.
Further, it can also open up space for judicial interventions and excessive juridification, thereby complicating matters which were best left to conventions. An example of this kind is the issue of the appointment of judges, which is done by the executive after consulting with the upper judiciary under Article 124. Scholars have argued that the convention of accepting the judiciary’s opinion has now been crystallised through the Second Judges Case which made the advice binding. But as recent events show, this matter is far from settled with increasingly strained executive-judiciary relations.

Tags GovernorConventions 








Suggested Reading


How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights

10 December 2021
												• By Meenakshi Ramkumar

B.R Ambedkar was faced with criticism from his Constituent Assembly colleagues: why were there restrictions on Fundamental Rights in the Draft Constitution?


 2 mins										




 

Ladakh’s Sixth Schedule Demand

25 February 2023
												• By Varsha Nair

Ladakh has been witnessing huge protests demanding constitutional safeguards for the region under the Sixth Schedule. We examine if this demand is legitimate. 


 3 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















