






























‘How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?’: A CLPR session at Ranga Shankara - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										‘How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?’: A CLPR session at Ranga Shankara


 



Talks
‘How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?’: A CLPR session at Ranga Shankara
Vineeth Krishna









										02 Jul																			

2022


Talks



 Venue
Ranga Shankara, Bangalore


Share








On 2nd July 2022, the Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR) took part in RS Connect, a public outreach programme conducted at Ranga Shankara, Bengaluru. 

Senior Associate Vineeth Krishna interacting with the audience at Ranga Shankara
In a public talk titled ‘How do we Engage with Our Constitution?’ CLPR resource persons discussed the importance of public engagement with India’s constitutional past and present, to build a vibrant constitutional culture in India. The talk was the first in a series of conversations conducted by CLPR and hosted by Ranga Shankara.
CLPR Senior Research Associate Vineeth Krishna began the talk by pointing out that recent political and social movements—like the CAA protests—have rallied around the Constitution. This, however, should not be seen as evidence for widespread awareness and appreciation of India’s constitutional values among Indians. Studies like the Yuva Nagarik Meter and Politics and Society Between Elections indicate that there is a long way to go.
He then moved on to explaining why Constitutions matter and how they regulate the social, economic and political life of institutions, groups and individual citizens. He traced the history of constitution-making in India by alerting the audience to the Historical Constitutions and sketching out the work of the Constituent Assembly.
Vineeth then focused on a specific constitutional provision—Article 17, which abolishes untouchability. He traced the arguments in the Constituent Assembly between those who wanted to limit the scope of untouchability to caste-based untouchability and those who wanted to keep its scope wide. He juxtaposed this with similar arguments made by lawyers in the Sabarimala Temple Entry Case and the final judgement.
He emphasized that reading the Constitution in this manner, by paying close attention to its text, the debates around it in the Constituent Assembly, and its contemporary interpretation by lawyers and judges in cases, is a key component of building a constitutional culture in India.
The session ended with an engaging question-answer session with the public.



Suggested Reading


Article 17: Abolition of Untouchability



New Website Launch






More in events





 Talks



‘Was India’s Independence Movement Solely About Freedom from the British?’: A CLPR Session at Ranga Shankara
 Ranga Shankara, Bangalore



Event Report


06 Aug
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















