






























Stanley Henry Prater - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Stanley Henry Prater


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Stanley Henry Prater
1890 - 1960




Key Information

Party: Independent
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Christian
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Minorities 



 




Biography


 





Biography


Early Life:
Stanley Henry Prater was born on 12th March 1890 and spent his early childhood in the Nilgiri Hills in South India where his father William Prater was a coffee planter. Brought up in an orphanage run by Jesuit priests in Bombay, he attended St. Mary’s High School. He developed an early interest in natural history and joined the Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS) in 1907. He went on to receive higher education at St. Xavier’s College, where he studied Biology. He became the Editor of the Journal of Bombay Natural History Society and soon thereafter, the Curator of the BNHS and Prince of Wales museum.
Role in the Indian Independence Movement:
Prater did not participate in the Independence Movement, choosing to represent the interests of the Anglo-Indian community at the legislative level.
Along with his environmental interests, Prater was the President of Anglo-Indian and Domiciled European Association, and their representative in the Bombay Legislative Assembly, from 1930 to 1947, for which he was awarded the Order of the British Empire in 1943.
Contributions to Constitution Making:
Prater represented the Anglo-Indian community in the Constituent Assembly. He was a member of the Advisory Committee, the Steering Committee and the Sub-Committee on Minorities. He did not make any interventions in the Assembly Debates.
Later Contributions:
He soon moved to Great Britain after 1947 and died in London on 12th October 1960 due to ill health.
Key Writings:
His biggest contribution was the Book of Indian Animals, in which he provided extensive observations about several Indian mammals, and stressed upon the need for conservation of biodiversity. He also wrote the series Wildlife Preservation in India, which was published in the BNHS journal in 1935.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















