






























R. K. Shanmukham Chetty - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										R. K. Shanmukham Chetty


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
R. K. Shanmukham Chetty
1892 - 1953




Key Information

Party: Independent
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
R.K. Shanmukham Chetty was born on 17 October 1892 into an affluent family of mill owners in Coimbatore. He spent his early years in Madras, completing his higher studies in Economics and Law from Madras Christian College and Madras Law College.
Role in the Indian Independence Movement:
Chetty held public office at a young age becoming the Councillor of the Coimbatore Municipality in 1917. He began his political career with the Indian National Congress but later shifted to the Justice Party of Madras. He was elected to the Madras Legislative Assembly in 1920. In 1923, he was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly.
In 1931 Chetty introduced a bill in the Central Legislative Assembly that sought to eliminate discrimination against the “untouchable community.
Chetty did not see eye to eye with the Congress Party. He was known to be pro-British and held key political positions under the colonial regime. These included: President, Central Legislative Assembly (1934) and Chairman, Tariff Board.
He was the Diwan of Cochin Princely State between 1935 to 1941. During his tenure, Chetty introduced a number of administrative reforms and worked towards the development of the Cochin Port that was important to the economic prosperity of the State.
Chetty was well-known for his economic and legal acumen. He represented India at several international platforms that included the 1928, 1929 and 1930 International Labour Organisation conferences in Geneva, the 1944 World Monetary Conference at Bretton Woods and the Assembly of League of Nations in 1938.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Chetty was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Madras presidency. He did not speak in the Constituent Assembly.
Later Contributions:
Chetty was India’s first Finance Minister and a member of the first Cabinet. He was one of three non-Congress individuals inducted into the Cabinet. On 26 November 1947 he presented independent India’s first budget. He resigned as India’s Finance minister in controversial circumstances: he was alleged to have been part of a scam that protected mill owner from tax evasion investigations.
Chetty significantly contributed to the development of important trade and commerce bodies. He was the head of the Tamil Nadu Industrial Investment Corporation and helped set up the South India Mills Association (1933), South India Textile Research Association and Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
He also contributed immensely to the Tamil language by founding the Tamil College in Perur (1953) and the London Tamil Sangam (1936). He also served as the President of the Tamil Isai Sangam between 1948 and 1953.
In 1951, he was appointed the Vice-Chancellor of Annamalai University, a post which he held for one year.
Chetty succumbed to a heart attack and passed away on 5 May 1953.


 



Resources



Economic ambassador: the life and work of Dr. Sir R. K. Shanmukham Chetty by Nilkan Perumal (Coimbatore, Popular Hindusthan Publications, 1954).
R. K. Shanmukham Chetty: The Great Indian Patriots – Volume 2 by P. Rajeswar Rao (Mittal Publications, 1991).
R. K. Shanmukham Chetty’s Bill to Remove Disabilities Affecting the Untouchable Caste of the Hindu Community, Indian Culture Archives.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















