






























The Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 







Home
								 ≫ 
												Committees
								 ≫ 
										The Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces


 






Constitution Making 
Committees

The Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces




















This Committee had to decide how the Chief Commissioners' Provinces, later renamed Union Territories, would be administered in independent India.


 





Members




 



 



 



 



 







 





										B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya (Chairperson), 										
										N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar, 										
										Deshbandhu Gupta, 										
										K. Santhanam, 										
										C. M. Poonacha, 										
										Hussain Imam, 										
										Mukut Bihari Lal Bhargava 



Meeting DatesAugust 21, 1947September 1, 1947September 30, 1947 


 




Background


On 30 July 1947, Deshbandhu Gupta moved an amendment in the Constituent Assembly requesting the appointment of a Committee to determine the future administration of Chief Commissioners’ Provinces. In British India, these Provinces were centrally administered by the Governor General and the question the Assembly had to engage with was whether this system of administration should continue in Independent India.
In fact, the move to appoint such a committee emerged while the Assembly was deliberating Part VIII of the Union Constitution Committee’s Report that addressed the special case of these Provinces. It mentioned that any changes to the administration of these Provinces must be specifically laid down in the Constitution. Following the adoption of Gupta’s amendment, the Assembly set up a seven member committee chaired by B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya.
The 1935 Government of India Act identified Princely States and Provinces as the two units of the Union having different status within the Federation. Granville Austin points out that it was B.N. Rau who in his Draft Constitution submitted to the Assembly added a third category to the federation— The Chief Commissioners’ Provinces.




Work Summary


The Committee held three meetings to look into the political and administrative workings of the five areas that were formerly under the direct control of the Centre— Panth Piploda, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Coorg, Ajmer-Merwara and Delhi.
Chairman Sitaramayya submitted the Committee’s Report to the Assembly on 21 October 1947 which was later tabled in the Assembly by B. R. Ambedkar on 4 November 1948. In its report, the Committee recommended that Panth Piploda be merged with the province of Ajmer-Merwara and the Andaman Nicobar Islands continue to be centrally Administered. The remaining three Provinces would be renamed ‘Lieutenant Governors’ Provinces’, functioning under a Lieutenant Governor appointed by the President of India. Importantly, they recommended that representative government institutions such as a Legislature be introduced in these Provinces, albeit in a limited manner. Unlike other States both the Central Legislature and the President would have significant powers over these areas.
The recommendations of the Committee did not experience a smooth sailing within the Assembly where many members were opposed to the introduction of the representative institutions in these Provinces. Subsequently, the recommendations went through significant changes by the Drafting Committee and the larger Assembly.




Key Documents


 Report of the Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces.




Resources



The Framing of India’s Constitution 1966, Vol. 3 by Shiva Rao
Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation by Granville Austin




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















