






























Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: MDRS, Kalaburagi Victorious in Inaugural Zonal Finals - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: MDRS, Kalaburagi Victorious in Inaugural Zonal Finals


 
















Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: MDRS, Kalaburagi Victorious in Inaugural Zonal Finals



Blog



Editorial Team






20 February 2024

Share









 
The KREIS edition of ConQuest in 2023, featured the regular grand finale of ConQuest along with a special Karnataka Residential Educational Institutions Society (KREIS). This edition involved preliminary and on-stage finals for students from KREIS government schools. 
Now, the Constitutiofindia.net team at CLPR is thrilled to announce our renewed collaboration with the Social Welfare Department, Government of Karnataka! CLPR will serve as the knowledge partner for the Ambedkar Constitution Quiz, organized for all KREIS schools across Karnataka by the KRESI and Social Welfare Department, GOK. We at Constitutiofindia.net are thrilled for the opportunity to extend our constitutional education resources to a broader group of school students! 
Unlike ConQuest, the questions in various rounds of this quiz and does not exclusively focus on the Constitution, although it remains the primary focus. Students engage with a diverse range of questions covering Indian history, geography, culture, and various other topics. 
The Quiz kicked off with a preliminary round, where teams from 833 KREIS schools participated in an online quiz. The top-performing teams from this round advanced to their respective zonal rounds, competing against other district finalists in their zones. The first of these zonal finals took place on February 15, 2024, featuring teams from KREIS schools in Ballari, Bidar, Kalaburagi, Koppal, Raichur, Vijayanagara, and Yadgiri districts. 
The zonal finals in Kalaburgi were closely contested, concluding with a question closer to home. Students were shown a picture of a large gathering in front of Vidhana Soudha, Bangalore, which occurred on September 15, 2023–the International Day of Democracy–and made its way into the Guinness Book of World Records. This event involved the mass reading of the preamble by 10,000 people! 

In the end, the winners of the first zonal round of the Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024 were Morarji Desai Residential Schools, Kalburgi (1st place), and Govt. Atal Bihari Vajpayee Residential School, Bidar (2nd place). The second runners-up were MDRS School in Koppal. The first two teams have secured their spots in the State Grand Finale, scheduled for February 24, 2024.
About 140 students from 8th, 9th, and 10th grades from Pratibhanvita Girls Residential School, Jagat, Kalaburagi, participated as audience in this quiz and enthusiastically engaged with the audience rounds! 
Stay tuned for the Belagavi zonal finals! 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















