






























II: The Union Territories - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
						 ≫ 
						Schedules
						 ≫ 
						II: The Union Territories


 








First Schedule

ARTICLES 1 AND 4


II: The Union Territories





Name


Extent




1. Delhi


The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioner’s Province of Delhi.




2. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands


The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioner’s Province of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.




3. Lakshadweep


The territory specified in section 6 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.




4. Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu


The territory which immediately before the eleventh day of August, 1961 was comprised in Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli and the territories specified in section 4 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987.




6. Puducherry


The territories which immediately before the sixteenth day of August, 1962, were comprised in the French Establishments in India known as Pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam.




7. Chandigarh


The territories specified in section 4 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.




8. Jammu and Kashmir


The territories specified in section 4 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019.




9. Ladakh


The territories specified in section 3 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019.








VERSION 1


Articles 1 and 4, Draft Constitution of India 1948
*Part 1
The territories known immediately before the commencement of this Constitution as the Governors’ Provinces of-

Madras,
Bombay
West Bengal
The United Provinces
Bihar
East Punjab
The Central Provinces and Berar,
Assam
Orissa

Part 2
The territories known immediately before the commencement of this Constitution as the Chief Commissioners’ Provinces of-

Delhi
Ajmer- Merwara including Panth Piploda
Coorg.

*The committee has anxiously considered the question whether Andhra should be specifically mentioned as a separate State in this Schedule. There was recently a statement by the Government on this subject, in which it was said that Andhra could be included among the Provinces in the Constitution as was done in the case of Orissa and Sind under the Government of India Act, 1935. Accordingly, the committee was at one stage inclined to mention Andhra as a distinct State in the Schedule.
On fuller consideration, however, the committee feels that the bare mention of the State in the Schedule will not suffice to bring it into being from the commencement of the new Constitution. Preparatory steps will have to be taken immediately under the present Constitution in order that the new State, with all the machinery of government, may be in being from the commencement of the new Constitution. This was what was done in the case of Orissa and Sind under the Act of 1935; they were made into separate Provinces with effect from April 1, 1936, while the Act came into operation on April 1, 1937. The committee therefore recommends that a Commission should be appointed to work out or inquire into all relevant matters not only as regards Andhra but also as regards other linguistic regions, with instructions to submit its report in time to enable any new States whose formation it may recommend to be created under section 290 of the Act of 1935 and to be mentioned in this Schedule before the Constitution is finally adopted.
Part 3
Division A
The following Indian States-

Mysore,
Kashmir,
Gwalior,
Baroda,
Travancore,
Cochin,
Udaipur,
Jaipur,
Jodhpur,
Bikaner,
Alwar,
Kotah,
Indore.
Bhopal,
Rewa.
Kolhapur,
Patiala,
Mayurbhanj,
United State of Kathiawar.

Division B*
All other Indian States which were within the Dominion of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution
*It is not possible to enumerate each of the States because owing to the mergers of various kinds many of the States may disappear in larger units. It will be necessary however to enumerate all the States by name before the Constitution is finally adopted
Part 4
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands.




VERSION 2


Articles 1, 4 and 391, Constitution of India 1950
Part B
Names of States

Hyderabad.
Jammu and Kashmir.
Madhya Bharat.
Mysore.
Patiala and East Punjab States Union.
Rajasthan.
Saurashtra.
Travancore-Cochin.
Vindhya Pradesh.

Territories of States
The territory of each of the States in this Part shall comprise the territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the corresponding Indian State, and—
a) in the case of each of the States of Rajasthan and Saurashtra, shall also comprise the territories which immediately before such commencement were being administered by the Government of the corresponding Indian State, whether under the provisions of the Extra-Provincial Jurisdiction Act, 1947, or otherwise; and
b) in the case of the State of Madhya Bharat, shall also comprise the territory which immediately before such commencement was comprised in the Chief Commissioner’s Province of Panth Piploda.
Part C
Names of States

Ajmer.
Bhopal.
Bilaspur.
Cooch-Behar.
Coorg.
Delhi.
Himachal Pradesh.
Kutch.
Manipur.
Tripura.

Territories of States
The territory of each of the States of Ajmer, Coorg and Delhi shall comprise the territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioners’ Provinces of Ajmer-Merwara, Coorg and Delhi, respectively.
The territory of each of the other States in this Part shall comprise the territories which, by virtue of an order made under section 290A of the Government of India Act, 1935, were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution being administered as if they were a Chief Commissioner’s Province of the same name.
Part D
⁠The Andaman and Nicobar Islands.




SUMMARY


The First Schedule of the Draft Constitution (First Schedule of the Constitution of India 1950) was discussed in the Constituent Assembly on 14 and 15 October 1949. It listed the States and Union territories of India.
The Drafting Committee Chairman introduced an amendment to replace the Draft Article with an updated Article. The President of the Constituent Assembly ruled out all amendments related to creation of new States, transfer of territories between States and omission of existing States. He believed that introducing these changes to the Constitution at present would create difficulties in the actual operation of the Constitution. He felt that only those amendments should presently be taken up by the Assembly, which were based on how the territories were already in place.
A few Assembly Members raised concern over non-consideration of all such matters. They were particularly interested in determining the status of some Princely States – whether these would exist as separate States or whether they would be part of the State which was temporarily administering them. One Member stated that the President by ruling out all such amendments related to merger and change of territories of States, was not letting representatives of such States to be heard in the Assembly. Another Member shared the opinion of the President that all matters related to delimitation and correction of boundaries of States must be taken up only after the Constitution comes into operation. He suggested that the whole schedule be adopted as it is as part of the Constitution and all other changes be taken up at a later stage.
On the question of changing the name of a State, a Drafting Committee Member explained the existing protocol that if a significant number of Assembly Members were in favour of a name change, the matter would be referred back to the Premier of the State after which it would be included in the Schedule. A Member strongly opposed this, arguing that not only the Premier, but the entire cabinet and Legislative Assembly of the State should be consulted before such an important move. The President finally suggested that any name change proposals would be forwarded by him to the respective State governments for their opinion, and any necessary changes would be made at a later stage.
The First Schedule as amended by the Drafting Committee Chairman was adopted as part of the Constitution on 15 October 1949.















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















