






























Desk Brief: A Brief History of the Supreme Court’s ‘Complete Justice’ Power - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: A Brief History of the Supreme Court’s ‘Complete Justice’ Power


 
















Desk Brief: A Brief History of the Supreme Court’s ‘Complete Justice’ Power



Blog



Editorial Team






19 May 2022

Share









 
									Image Credit: Wikimedia Commons								

On 11 June 1991, 19-year-old Perarivalan was arrested for conspiring to assassinate Rajiv Gandhi. He was convicted for supplying batteries and other bomb materials to the suicide bomber who killed Rajiv Gandhi on 21 May 1991.
Perarivalan was sentenced to death.
In 2014 however, the Supreme Court commutated the sentence to life imprisonment as the President of India had been sitting on Perarivalan’s mercy petition for more than a decade. On 18 May 2022, nearly another decade later, the Court ordered the release of Perarivalan invoking its extraordinary powers under Article 142 of the Constitution.
Article 142 gives the Supreme Court the power to ‘…pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it…’. The Court has interpreted this power to do ‘complete justice‘ rather widely and used it in a manner that has attracted controversy and debate.
The constitutional antecedent of Article 142 is Section 210 of the Government of India Act 1935 titled ‘Enforcement of decrees and orders of Federal Court and orders as to discovery…’. It empowered the Federal Court to secure attendance and production of documents in cases that invoked its civil and criminal jurisdiction. It also granted the Federal Court the power to investigate and punish matters relating to its contempt. The section cast a general obligation on all authorities to ‘aid the Federal Court’. Arguably, the section provided the Court with procedural and contempt powers.
Thirteen years later, Section 210 found its way into the Draft Constitution, 1948. Draft Article 118 (Article 142, Constitution of India 1950) carried the same title as Section 210 of the Government of India Act, except that it replaced ‘Federal Court’ with ‘Supreme Court’. It also retained the procedural and contempt powers present in Section 210.
Draft Article 118 contained a new clause that was not present in Section 210. This new clause gave the Supreme Court the power to pass any decree or order in the interest of achieving ‘complete justice’. What did doing ‘complete justice‘ mean? What types of Supreme Court actions come under the ambit of doing ‘complete justice‘? The Draft Article was adopted unopposed and without debate in the Constituent Assembly on 27 May 1949. So we are left without a sense of the Constituent Assembly’s intention of adding this new clause.
However, the term ‘complete justice’ was invoked by Constituent Assembly members while discussing other provisions of the Draft Constitution. During the debate around the Special Leave to Appeal, Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar noted that the Court could develop its own jurisprudence to do ‘complete justice’ in any case/matter. On the same day, Thakur Das Bhargava said that the Supreme Court enjoyed ‘divine rights’. He invoked Draft Article 118 to argue that the ‘Supreme Court will be able to deliver any judgment which does complete justice between States and between the persons before it’.
While some in the Assembly believed that the Supreme Court’s powers under Draft Article 118 were unfettered, the broader history of this Draft Article 118 suggests that it was intended to be limited to the exercise of procedural powers, such as the power to call for documents, witnesses, etc. and pursue matters of contempt.
In any case, after having spent 30 years in prison, with no decisions taken over his mercy petitions for decades and elongated political jostling over his release, Perarivalan would have walked out of prison with a sense that the Court had given him ‘complete justice’.

Tags Indian JudiciaryThe Supreme Court 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















