






























M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar
1891 - 1978




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Telugu
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Madabhushi Ananthasayanam Ayyangar was born on 4th of February 1891 in Thiruchanur, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh. He attended the Devasthana High School, Tirupati and went on to obtain a B.A degree from Pachiappa’s College, and a law degree from Madras Law College.
After having begun his career as a Mathematics teacher, Ayyangar joined the legal profession in 1915 and built a law practice. He advocated for Indian judicial reform-argued for the judicial system to be centred on Indian conditions rather than merely importing the British practices.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
He was deeply involved in the Non-Cooperation Movement in 1921, individual Satyagraha in 1940 and the Quit India Movement in 1942.
In 1934, he was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly from the Indian Congress Party as a move to influence the British from within the government. In the Legislative Assembly, he was known for his oratory and debating skills; he took part in the proceedings and provided valuable insights on all issues.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Ayyangar was elected to the Assembly from Madras province on a Congress Party ticket.
In the Assembly, he actively participated in the debates and intervened in issues ranging from fundamental rights of arrested and detained persons, to the Supreme Court.
Later Contributions:
Ayyangar was appointed as the Deputy Speaker between 1952 to 1956 and thereafter as the Speaker of Lok Sabha from 8th March 1956 to 16th April 1962.
He held various positions including Delegate, Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, Ottawa, 1952; Chairman, Railway Convention Committee, 1954; Governor of Bihar between 1962 and 1967.
He passed away in 1978.
Key Writings:
His writings include ‘Our Parliament and Indian Culture and Religious Thought‘.


 



Key Speeches



During the discussion on Article 22 (which deals with protection against arrest and detention), he argued against imposing 24 hours time limit to produce an arrested person before the magistrate.
When the Assembly was discussing articles on the Supreme Court, he asserted for a strong and independent judiciary. He pointed out the importance of laying down provisions that regulate the appointment of judges, salary and tenure of office to ensure no interference from the executive.
Invoking the example of American President Roosevelt appointing Felix Frankfurter, Professor from Harvard University, to the US Supreme Court, Ayyangar argued that our Constitution must allow for the appointment of a jurist to the Supreme Court.
Days before the Constitution was adopted, he made a long speech hailing the efforts of the Assembly in the drafting of the Constitution. He pointed out that in a world where countries are either ‘political democracies’ with economic dictatorship or ‘socialist dictatorships’ with no political freedom, India emerged as a ‘socialist democracy’ protecting both political and economic freedoms of its citizens.



 



Resources



Eminent Parliamentarians Monograph Series



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















