






























Desk Brief: Opposing Democracy? - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Opposing Democracy?


 
















Desk Brief: Opposing Democracy?



Blog



Editorial Team






16 December 2021

Share









 
On the first day of the current Winter session of Parliament, the Rajya Sabha Chairman suspended 12 opposition members of his house for the entire session. They were alleged to have engaged in ‘unruly‘ behaviour and ‘misconduct’ in the previous Monsoon session.
The suspension has triggered a political backlash. Opposition parties argue that the protests in the previous session were a response to government silence on key political issues like Pegasus and Farm Laws. Further, they claim that the suspension of their MPs lacked due process and was part of the Government’s continued efforts to stifle opposition and deliberation in Parliament.
In the Monsoon session of 2021 on average, each Bill was discussed only for 34 minutes in the Lok Sabha and 46 minutes in the Rajya Sabha. It is striking to note that only one bill – the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2021 was discussed for over one hour in Parliament. This appears to give some credence to claims by opposition parties that they are not getting adequate space to fully participate in parliamentary proceedings.
Our Constitution framers envisioned a Parliament in which the opposition played a key role. In fact, the Constituent Assembly had even considered a proposal to give constitutional and statutory recognition to the leader of the Opposition. While the Assembly eventually decided not to do so, the debate around this proposal saw members take turns to reiterate the critical role of an opposition.
Z.H. Lari remarked: ‘Who is to make the public aware and take interest in the doings of Government, unless there is oppositions in House to bring all the actions of Government into the lime-light?’.
Speaking more curtly, Naziruddin Ahmad, stated: ‘If we cannot ensure any opposition, we should rather call the constitution that of an ‘undemocratic, sovereign republic’.
The Constituent Assembly itself was designed to give adequate space for effective opposition. The Indian National Congress, which was the dominant political force at the time, invited individuals who had been its fiercest ideological critics to join the constitution-making process on Congress Party tickets. A stark example of this was B.R. Ambedkar.
In the current Winter session, the government plans to consider 29 Bills. The 12 suspended MPs cannot participate in discussions around these critical legislative proposals. Among other things, these Bills deal with financial regulation, agriculture, environment, dam safety, reproductive rights and other subjects that can significantly impact the lives of Indians.

Tags Indian Constituent AssemblyParliamentLok SabhaRajya Sabha 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















