






























V.C. Kesava Rao - Constitution of India

























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										V.C. Kesava Rao


 



Constituent Assembly Members
V.C. Kesava Rao
1917 - 1995




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: 
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Telugu
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life:
V.C. Kesava Rao was born on 24 May 1917 and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Not much information on Rao’s engagement in the Indian independence movement is known.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Rao was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Madras Province in 1946 on a Congress party ticket. In the Assembly, he took part in discussions relating to the compensation to be provided to citizens whose land is acquired by the Government and equality.
Later Contributions:
Rao had an active political role post independence. He was a member of the Provisional Parliament between 1950 and 1952. Rao then went on to become a member of the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly in 1967 and also served two tenures in the Rajya Sabha from 1962 – 1967 and 1974 – 1986.
He was appointed the President of the Andhra Pradesh Congress Committee in 1971.
He passed away on 26 April 1995.


 



Key Speeches



While discussing the compensation to be provided to landowners upon government acquisition, Rao suggested that the clause be amended to ensure that nominal compensation is paid for land acquisition by the government since such acquisition would be in the interest of the public and for public benefit.
On equality, Rao proposed adding ‘schools’ and ‘temples’ to a clause that described the various public establishments in which discrimination based on religion, race, caste and sex should not be allowed. He noted that in schools, there was a possibility of segregation in seating and added that in temples, discrimination often took place by way of non-admission of untouchables.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















