






























The Constituent Assembly's Concerns over President's Ordinance Powers - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										The Constituent Assembly’s Concerns over President’s Ordinance Powers


 
















The Constituent Assembly’s Concerns over President’s Ordinance Powers



Blog



Siddharth Jha






22 May 2023

Share









 
									K.T. Shah and Hriday Nath Kunzru								

Last Friday, the President of India promulgated an ordinance under Article 123 of the Constitution, that reversed the effect of an important Supreme Court judgement. The judgement had handed control of civil servants and day-to-day administration in the National Capital Territory of Delhi, to the duly elected Delhi government. Opposition leaders have been sharply critical of this move, describing it as an “open challenge” and an “insult” to the Supreme Court’s authority.
When the ordinance-making powers of the President were being discussed in the Constituent Assembly, members were concerned about more fundamental implications of such a power—namely, the allocation of legislative powers to the executive and the violation of the doctrine of separation of powers.
Hriday Nath Kunzru agreed that an emergency situation might require some immediate action by the government in the form of an ordinance, but failed to see why Parliament shouldn’t convene immediately, or as soon as possible to deal with the situation. K.T. Shah supported this argument, calling the ordinance making power “a negation of the rule of law,” and an “extreme power in the hands of the executive.”
The response of the Chairman of the Drafting Committee B.R. Ambedkar is revelatory. Firstly, he acknowledged the concerns of the members but pointed out that there must be some mechanism by which the executive could deal with unforeseen situations through legislation, when Parliament is not in session. Secondly, he allayed Kunzru’s concerns over the time period of an ordinance by saying that Parliament would likely have to meet quite frequently, therefore the existing Article had sufficient protections.
Unfortunately, even since Prime Minister Nehru’s time, consecutive governments have not respected the need for constraint, averaging nearly 10 ordinances a year. Can such a frequent use of this power be justified as being absolutely necessary? What the Constituent Assembly hoped would be a rare and unusual power to meet unforeseen circumstances has been converted into a tool to overcome parliamentary scrutiny. The most egregious misuse of this power occurred in Bihar in the 1970s, when the state government kept on re-promulgating ordinances without even bothering to bring them to the floor of the legislative assembly.
Declaring the re-promulgations to be unconstitutional, Justice P.N. Bhagwati commented strongly:
“The power to promulgate an Ordinance is essentially a power to be used to meet an extraordinary situation and it cannot be allowed to be ‘perverted to serve political ends.’”
While the Constituent Assembly was more concerned about the possibility of the executive abrogating legislative powers to itself, the political controversy unfolding in the present seems to be taking a different form. Now, the executive has chosen to step on the judiciary’s toes as well through the ordinance route. With all three pillars of the state drawn into the issue, the way this matter resolves itself will have important consequences for the doctrine of separation of powers, and the health of Indian democracy itself.

Tags supreme courtordinancearticle 123 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Why India’s Vice President is Wrong About Parliamentary Sovereignty

07 January 2023
												• By Varsha Nair

On 7 December 2022, Vice President Jagdeep Dhankar declared that ‘Parliament is the exclusive and ultimate determinative of the architecture of the Constitution’ and insisted that ‘the basic structure is primacy of the will of the people’. Are we at the beginning of another inter-institutional debate, 40 years after the Basic Structure Doctrine?


 3 mins										




 

The Tamil Nadu Governor and Constitutional Conventions

25 February 2023
												• By Siddharth Jha

On 9 January 2023, the Governor of Tamil Nadu chose to skip certain portions of the speech prepared by the state government, while addressing the first session of the Legislative Assembly in the new year. This kicked off a huge political row, with the ruling party in Tamil Nadu alleging a serious breach of “convention”.


 3 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















