






























Why India's Vice President is Wrong About Parliamentary Sovereignty - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Why India’s Vice President is Wrong About Parliamentary Sovereignty


 
















Why India’s Vice President is Wrong About Parliamentary Sovereignty



Blog



Varsha Nair






07 January 2023

Share









 
In February 1965 Dieter Conrad, a German constitutional scholar asked his audience if the Indian Parliament could ‘…abolish Article 21, to the effect that forthwith a person could be deprived of his life or personal liberty without authorisation by law?’ Conrad was speaking at the Law Faculty, Banaras Hindu University as part of his India lecture tour. ‘Could the ruling party’, he continued, ‘if it sees its majority shrinking, amend Article 368 to the effect that the amending power rests with the president acting on the advice of the prime minister?’
Conrad presented these as ‘fictive’ scenarios to understand the true nature of constitutional concepts. However, it is possible that Conrad did not view these scenarios as completely hypothetical—his experiences in Germany informed his views on the importance of limiting the power to amend the Constitution. An unrestricted amendment power, for Conrad, was a critical path by which Hitler and the Nazis took on absolute power in Germany.
The Enabling Act of 1933 was a key moment in the rise of the Nazi Party in Germany and the consolidation of their power. The Act, passed by the German Parliament on March 23, 1933 was drafted invoking the Parliament’s amending power of the Weimar Constitution.
Adolf Hitler making a speech on the Enabling Act in the German ParliamentImage Credit: Wikimedia Commons
The Act was a key piece of legislation that gave the Nazi Party and Adolf Hitler sweeping powers to pass laws and make changes to the German Constitution without the input or consent of the Reichstag (the German parliament). Many civil liberties were suspended and the concentration of power in the hands of the Nazi Party ultimately resulting in the atrocities of the Holocaust and World War II. The Act effectively dispatched the Weimar Constitution to the grave, and proved to be a historical example of how a provision of the Constitution was used to bury itself.
In response to this, the framers of the 1949 German Constitution included Article 79 (3) to prevent any amendments to the Constitution that would undermine the fundamental principles of the Basic Law or the federal structure of the German state. This was seen as an important step in ensuring that the abuses of power that marked the Nazi era could not be repeated in the future.
About three months before Conrad’s speech at Banaras University, the Supreme Court of India in Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan, 1964 held that Parliament could change any part of the Constitution as it pleased. It held that this power was vested in Article 368 of the Constitution, which gave the Parliament the power to amend the Constitution. The next decade was punctuated with a string of constitutional cases in which the extent of parliament’s power to amend the Constitution were debated. These cases often involved challenges to land redistribution.
Prof. Dieter ConradImage Credit: South Asia Institute, Heidelberg University
This culminated in the Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, 1973 case, where the Indian Supreme Court ruled that Article 368 of the Indian Constitution did not extend to its basic structure. Dieter Conrad’s arguments featured prominently in this case.
Since then, the idea that parliament could not change some parts of the Constitution has been largely accepted, albeit with some episodic resistance from various quarters. But there never was a serious attack on the doctrine. Until now.
On 7 December 2022, Vice President Jagdeep Dhankar declared that ‘Parliament is the exclusive and ultimate determinative of the architecture of the Constitution’. On a different occasion, he insisted that, ‘the basic structure is primacy of the will of the people’.
Contrary to the Vice President’ s beliefs, India’s Parliament is not sovereign. And we don’t need to invoke the basic structure doctrine to make this point. We just need to point to the existence of the Constitution. If our Constitution Framers believed that Parliament and all the laws it passes must be supreme, then why did they enact a Constitution to constrain the power of different authorities in the first place? Why would they include the Parliament in this list?
40 years after the Basic Structure Doctrine, it appears that we are at the beginning of the inter-institutional debate all over again. Dieter Conrad will surely figure in this legal and political jostling over the Constitution.

Tags Basic StructureGerman ConstitutionWeimar ConstitutionDieter Conrad 








Suggested Reading


Constitution Day Campaign | Kozhikode | Mock Parliament and Quiz



50th Anniversary of Kesavananda Bharati Case










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

The Constituent Assembly’s Concerns over President’s Ordinance Powers

22 May 2023
												• By Siddharth Jha

Last Friday, the President promulgated an ordinance overturning a significant Supreme Court judgment. Did our Constitution framers intend for the ordinance powers to be used in such a manner?


 2 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















