






























Desk Brief: Constitution Framers Refused to Regulate Religious Attire - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Constitution Framers Refused to Regulate Religious Attire


 
















Desk Brief: Constitution Framers Refused to Regulate Religious Attire



Blog



Editorial Team






16 February 2022

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

We appear to be in the midst of a heated public debate around religious attire in educational institutions. 74 years ago, the Indian Constituent Assembly took a decision on a proposal that sought to restrict religious attire in public spaces.
On 3 December 1948, the Assembly took up Draft Article 19 (Article 25, Constitution of India 1950) for debate. The Draft Article stated that ‘all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion’. It contained an ‘Explanation’ that said: ‘The wearing and carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to be included in the profession of the Sikh religion’.
Tajamul Hussain, a barrister and political leader from Bihar, moved an amendment to replace the explanation with: ‘No person shall have any visible sign or mark or name, and no person shall wear any dress whereby his religion may be recognised’.
He felt that religion was a private matter between an individual and God. In ‘civilised’ places like Europe and the United States, he continued, one could not identify a person’s religion from their name or clothes. There was a certain uniformity in attire. In India, Hussain lamented, ‘You find dhoties, you find pyjamas, you find kurtas, you find shirts, and again, no shirts, no dhoties, nakedness, all sorts of things…’.
In the interest of secularism and national integration, he tried to convince his fellow members that Indians must ‘all have one kind of dress; one kind of name; and no visible signs’. Maulana Hasrat Mohani suggested that Hussain should begin by changing his own name as it signalled his religion. Hussain said he was ready to do so if the whole country accepted his proposal.
Apart from Mohani’s cheeky intervention, there was no substantive response from members to Hussain’s amendment. Most members likely found the amendment bizarre in light of India’s diversity and the predicament of religious minorities a the time. When put to vote, the Constituent Assembly categorically rejected the amendment hence placing no restriction on religious attire in public spaces.

Tags Indian Constituent AssemblyReligious attire 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















