






























When The Constituent Assembly Debated Space Travel - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										When The Constituent Assembly Debated Space Travel


 
















When The Constituent Assembly Debated Space Travel



Blog









30 August 2023

Share









 
On August 23, the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) commanded global attention by successfully landing the spacecraft, Chandrayaan, on the moon’s south pole — a feat that marked India as the first nation to accomplish such a task. Tracing back the roots of India’s triumphant space program, it dates to the early 1960s when Nehru established the Indian National Committee for Space Research, largely upon the recommendation of Vikram Sarabhai. Sarabhai then became the ISRO’s inaugural chairman and envisioned India as a significant player in space research, development, and exploration.
However, contemplation on India’s role in space wasn’t confined to this timeframe. A vision envisaging India’s involvement in space can be traced back to decades earlier. One notable figure with futuristic insights was H.V. Kamath, who passionately suggested to his fellow Constituent Assembly members, in 1949, that the Indian Constitution should include provisions on space travel.
On August 31st, 1949, the Constituent Assembly was busy categorizing ‘items’ into the Union and State Lists, which would determine the areas over which the Union and State governments, respectively, would have legislative and executive powers. Amidst this process, H.V. Kamath proposed an unconventional addition to the Union List: ‘interplanetary travel’. This elicited laughter from the assembly members, but Kamath remained undeterred:
within the last fifty years there has been more advance in the various fields of science than in the previous five hundred years…researches in X-rays, medicine, jet propelled planes of which we hear so much today, we can expect many big changes in the near future. The advance has been remarkable, phenomenal…
For Kamath, interplanetary travel was a plausible response to the increasing population and congestion on Earth. He foresaw a not-so-distant future in which humans would reach our natural satellite—the moon.
Nazzirudin Ahmad was apparently the sole Assembly member who earnestly discussed Kamath’s amendment. He suggested Kamath’s proposal was flawed – “interplanetary travel,” he argued, did not fully encompass travel between planets and their satellites, nor did it cover travel between satellites themselves.
Ambedkar provided the last remarks on the discussion, and his lack of enthusiasm was apparent:
I do not quite understand whether the proposals of my Friend relate to matters which are unknowable or which relate to matters which are unknown. If they are unknown, then we have waste our time. But if they are unknown and not unknowable, then we have enough powers to deal with them. Why bother with any entry at all? 
Kamath’s and Nazzirudin’s proposals were put to vote, and the Assembly, unsurprisingly, rejected both.
While Kamath’s federal perspective wasn’t the cause of the Assembly’s amusement, it’s likely the Assembly would have agreed that space-related activities should fall under the Union government’s exclusive domain. This indeed became the case once India initiated its space program. The laughter was provoked, instead, by Kamath’s predictions about the speed of technological advancements. 
Surprisingly, Kamath’s predictions were rather accurate. He estimated humans would reach the moon within 25 years; in reality, Neil Armstrong landed there only 20 years after Kamath’s proclamation. Furthermore, Kamath’s rationale — that human population growth and the strain on Earth’s resources would necessitate interstellar travel — resonates with the beliefs of SpaceX CEO Elon Musk. Like Kamath, Musk’s vision wasn’t taken seriously until recent breakthroughs in SpaceX’s rocket technology program and the escalating urgency of climate change. 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















