






























O.V. Alagesan - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										O.V. Alagesan


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
O.V. Alagesan
1911 - 1992




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
O.V. Alagesan was born on 6th September 1911 in Ozhalur village in Tamil Nadu. He studied at Presidency College in Madras from 1928-1930, after which he discontinued his studies to participate in the freedom struggle.
Although he worked as an agriculturist, he soon gave it up to pursue his political ambitions. He was a member of the Chengalpattu Taluk Congress Committee from 1930-1935 and the Tamil Nadu Congress Committee from 1945-48.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Alagesan left college in 1930 to join the Salt Satyagraha movement in 1930. He was also an active participant in the Civil Disobedience movement, the Individual Satyagraha movement, and the Quit India movement. As a result, he was imprisoned for over three years.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Alagesan was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras on a Congress Party ticket. He intervened in the debates on bicameralism and preventive detention.
Later Contributions:
Alagesan was elected to the Lok Sabha three times: in 1952, 1962, and 1971. During his terms as a Member of Parliament, he also served as the Union Minister for Transport and Railways from 1952-57, and the Minister of State for Irrigation and Power from 1962-63.
In addition to his work in politics, Alagesan founded the Bhaktavatsalam Educational Trust in 1958, which continues to manage a number of educational and vocational institutes.
He passed away in 1992.


 



Resources



Alagesan voiced his displeasure at the adoption of the bicameral system of governance.
He also expressed concern about the misuse of the provisions on preventive detention.
In the debates on Articles 226 and 229, he spoke about the dangers to provincial autonomy caused by State encroachment.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















