






























P. R. Thakur - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										P. R. Thakur


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
P. R. Thakur
1904 - 1967




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Scheduled Caste
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bengali
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Minorities 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Prominent political and spiritual leader, Pramatha Ranjan Thakur was born in 1904 in Faridpur, Bengal Presidency. He completed his schooling in Calcutta. He then went on to graduate from St. Paul’s Cathedral Mission College and subsequently completed a law degree from Calcutta University. Thakur trained at the Bar in London – being the first barrister from the Namasudra community, a group of lower-caste peasants mostly based in eastern and central Bengal. He later practised at the Calcutta High Court.
Thakur travelled extensively and was particularly interested in visiting places of historical significance in France, Germany, Switzerland, Hungary and Turkey.
Thakur’s family played a pivotal role in Scheduled Caste politics in East Bengal: his great grandfather founded a religious sect – Matua Mahasangha – in the later 19th Century which was subsequently mobilised by his grandfather Guruchand Thakur in the 20th Century. Thakur’s leadership of the Matua Mahasangha influenced his political life.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
In 1930 Thakur took over as the leader of the Matua Mahasangha sect. While he continued his spiritual work towards his community, he ventured into organised politics. He established the Bengal chapter of the Depressed Classes League – a political rival to the Bengal Provincial Scheduled Castes Federations established by Jogendranath Mondal. Thakur’s organisation was affiliated with the Indian National Congress.
In 1937 and 1946, he was elected to the Bengal Legislative Assembly as an independent candidate. During his tenure as a member of the Bengal Legislative Assembly, he opposed important legislations like the Secondary Education Bill for not having adequate representation of the Depressed Classes in the management of education.
Unlike, his contemporary Mondal, Thakur did not believe that the Muslim community and Dalit community had similar interests and therefore, he opposed partition.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Thakur was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 from Bengal with the support of the Congress Party. He intervened in important issues on safeguards for the Depressed Classes, justiciable rights and untouchability.
Later Contributions
Thakur continued his social, political and religious work post-independence as well. He was elected to the Bengal Legislative Assembly in 1957 and 1962. He was Minister of State, Tribal Welfare Department (1962-63). When the Indian State unleashed repressive measures on the refugee colonies that comprised the Namasudra population, he resigned from the Assembly in 1964. He distanced himself from organised politics and focused on social service.
As the spiritual leader of the Matua Mahasangha, Thakur set up Thakurnagar – a Dalit refugee colony in December 1947. His residential home was named, ‘Exile’ and served as temporary accommodation for many people belonging to the Depressed Classes who migrated to West Bengal after the Partition. Thakur encouraged the members of the Namasudra community to resettle in other parts of India as well.
He passed away in 1967.


 



Key Speeches



While supporting the Objectives Resolution, Thakur stated that the Depressed Classes are to be considered a minority and in order to protect their interests adequate safeguards must be provided in the Constitution.
During a debate on fundamental rights, Thakur argued that economic rights are also very important, and they must also be made justiciable like fundamental rights.
Thakur was concerned that the prohibition of untouchability would not be possible without eradication of the caste system.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















