






























K. Kamaraj - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										K. Kamaraj


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
K. Kamaraj
1903 - 1975




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Middle School



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Kumaraswamy Kamaraj was born on 15th July, 1903 in Virudhunagar in Tamil Nadu into a Nadar caste family. He attended Kshatriya Vidhyasala High School in Virudhnagar until 5th standard. Both the Indian National Congress and Mahatma Gandhi were major influences in Kamaraj’s life from a young age.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Kamaraj was a vocal activist against the British Raj, who was inspired to join the freedom struggle by the Jallianwala Bagh massacre. His participation in the Salt Satyagraha resulted in the first of several imprisonments. He also participated in the Nagpur flag Satyagraha, and led the Sword Satyagraha and the Neil Statue Satyagraha. In 1942, he was jailed for three years for his involvement in the Quit India Movement.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Kamaraj was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Madras constituency on a Congress Party ticket. He did not actively participate in the debates.
Later Contributions:
Kamaraj became the Chief Minister of Madras province in 1954, a post which he held for three terms until 1963. Among his achievements was the improvement in literacy rates, the mid-day meal scheme, and efforts to address caste discrimination, and the provision of irrigation and electricity facilities to villages.
He was the architect of the 1963 Kamaraj Plan, which set out a blueprint to rebuild the Congress party in the aftermath of the Indo-China war. Subsequently, he was appointed president of the party.
Kamaraj is credited with giving two Prime Ministers to India after he twice refused to take the position himself. He left the Congress due to its split in 1969, but merged his Congress (O) party with the INC in 1975.
Kamaraj passed away on 2nd October 1975. He was awarded with the Bharat Ratna posthumously in 1976.


 



Resources



The Life and Times of K Kamaraj
K.Kamaraj, A Socio-political study
Perunthalaivar Kamarajar



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















