






























Article 53: Executive Power of the Union - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
53



Executive Power of the Union

(1) The executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the supreme command of the Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested in the President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law.
(3) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred by any existing law on the
Government of any State or other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on authorities other than the President.



 
 

Version 1




Article 42, Draft Constitution of India 1948
(1) The executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and may be exercised by him in accordance with the Constitution and the law.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the supreme command of the Defence Forces of India shall be vested in the President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law.
(3) Nothing in this article shall-
(a) Be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred by any existing law on the Government of any State or other authority, or
(b) Prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on authorities other than the President.




Version 2


Article 53, Constitution of India 1950
(1) The executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
⁠(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the supreme command or the Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested in the President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law.
⁠(3) Nothing in this article shall —
(a) be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred by any existing law on the Government of any State or other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on authorities other than the President.




Summary


Draft Article 42 was debated by the Constituent Assembly on 10 December 1948 and 16 October 1949. The Draft Article placed the executive power of the Union with the President of India.
One member proposed to make it explicit in the Article that the President’s executive power was subject to the advice and help of the Union Government. This would reiterate and make it clear that the Assembly had adopted a parliamentary system of government and not a presidential one.
Another member wanted to include ‘on behalf of the people of India‘ in the first clause to signal that sovereignty and popular will lay with the people. Unlike the Government of India Act 1935, he continued, that enabled the Governor-General to exercise executive power on behalf of the ‘King-Emperor of India’, the Indian Constitution should mention that executive power was exercised on behalf of the people.
There was another proposal that exhaustively listed out all the powers and responsibilities of the President. The member who proposed this argued that for a new nation like India, the President’s powers must be clearly laid out in the Constitution to avoid any ambiguities. Several members opposed this move: a member of the Drafting Committee pointed out that the proposal went against the decision of the Assembly to adopt a parliamentary form of democracy.
The Assembly adopted the Draft Article on 10 December 1948 without any amendments. However, the Constituent Assembly reopened discussions on 16 October 1949.
The Drafting Committee moved a minor amendment which enabled the President to exercise his power even through his subordinates. Some members felt that this amendment was redundant and unnecessary. They argued that it was understood that the President would be exercising his power through his ‘agents’. As one member put it ‘This attempt to clarify things is grossly exaggerating the idea of going into details’. The members of the Drafting Committee responded by highlighting that the President would not really exercise his executive power himself; He would ‘simply exercise them at the dictation of other people who are responsible to the legislature’ and the amendment embodied and clarified this scheme.
The Assembly accepted the amendment and adopted the Draft Article.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















