






























Part VI Archives - Constitution of India






















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII







 
Part VI
The States
Part VI of the Constitution contains provisions for the functioning of the State governments. It establishes a parliamentary system of government at the state level, a federal system of government, and the judicial system at the state level.
Read More 


 





Articles 152 to 237





Chapter I.—General




Article 152: Definition








Chapter II.—The Executive




Article 153: Governors of States


Article 154: Executive power of State


Article 155: Appointment of Governor


Article 156: Term of office of Governor


Article 157: Qualifications for appointment as Governor


Article 158: Conditions of Governor’s office


Article 159: Oath or affirmation by the Governor


Article 160: Discharge of the functions of the Governor in certain contingencies


Article 161: Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases


Article 162: Extent of executive power of State


Article 163: Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor


Article 164: Other provisions as to Ministers


Article 165: Advocate-General for the State


Article 166: Conduct of business of the Government of a State


Article 167: Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor, etc.








Chapter III.—The State Legislature




Article 168: Constitution of Legislatures in States


Article 169: Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States


Article 170: Composition of the Legislative Assemblies


Article 171: Composition of the Legislative Councils


Article 172: Duration of State Legislatures


Article 173: Qualification for membership of the State Legislature


Article 174: Sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation and dissolution


Article 175: Right of Governor to address and send messages to the House or Houses


Article 176: Special address by the Governor


Article 177: Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the Houses


Article 178: The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly


Article 179: Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker


Article 180: Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker


Article 181: The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration


Article 182: The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council


Article 183: Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Chairman and Deputy Chairman


Article 184: Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman


Article 185. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration


Article 186: Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and the Chairman and Deputy Chairman


Article 187: Secretariat of State Legislature


Article 188: Oath or affirmation by members


Article 189: Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum


Article 190: Vacation of seats


Article 191: Disqualifications for membership


Article 192: Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members


Article 193: Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under article 188 or when not qualified or when disqualified


Article 194: Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the members and committees thereof


Article 195: Salaries and allowances of members


Article 196: Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills


Article 197: Restriction on powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other than Money Bills


Article 198: Special procedure in respect of Money Bills


Article 199: Definition of “Money Bills”


Article 200: Assent to Bills


Article 201: Bills reserved for consideration


Article 202: Annual financial statement


Article 203: Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates


Article 204: Appropriation Bills


Article 205: Supplementary, additional or excess grants


Article 206: Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants


Article 207: Special provisions as to financial Bills


Article 208: Rules of procedure


Article 209: Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State in relation to financial business


Article 210: Language to be used in the Legislature


Article 211: Restriction on discussion in the Legislature


Article 212: Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature








Chapter IV.—Legislative Power of the Governor




Article 213: Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature








Chapter V.—The High Courts in the States




Article 214: High Courts for States


Article 215: High Courts to be courts of record


Article 216: Constitution of High Courts


Article 217: Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High Court


Article 218: Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to High Courts


Article 219: Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts


Article 220: Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge


Article 221: Salaries, etc., of Judges


Article 222: Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another


Article 223: Appointment of acting Chief Justice


Article 224: Appointment of additional and acting Judges


Article 224A: Appointment of retired Judges at sittings of High Courts


Article 225: Jurisdiction of existing High Courts


Article 226: Power of High Courts to issue certain writs


Article 227: Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court


Article 228: Transfer of certain cases to High Court


Article 229: Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts


Article 230: Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories


Article 231: Establishment of a common High Court for two or more States








Chapter VI.—Subordinate Courts




Article 233: Appointment of district judges


Article 233A: Validation of appointments of, and judgments, etc., delivered by, certain district judges


Article 234: Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial service


Article 235: Control over subordinate courts


Article 236: Interpretation


Article 237: Application of the provisions of this Chapter to certain class or classes of magistrates





 
 



 
More About Part VI: The States

Part VI of the Constitution contains provisions for the functioning of the State governments. It establishes a parliamentary system of government at the state level, a federal system of government, and the judicial system at the state level.




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















