






























Kiran Sankar Roy - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Kiran Sankar Roy


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Kiran Sankar Roy
1891 - 1949




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Provincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Kiran Sankar Roy was born at Teota in present day Bangladesh in 1891. He pursued his primary education at the Teota Academy and completed higher secondary education in Hindu School, Calcutta. Roy joined St. Xavier’s College and later Bangabasi College where he studied intermediate arts.
During his time in college, Roy was influenced by the radical nationalist movement. To keep him away from participating in the movement, his family sent him to England to pursue his higher education – Roy enrolled in New College, Oxford (1910). He was a prominent member of the Oxford Indian Majlis and was appointed as its President for a term. He graduated with a degree in History (1913).
On his return to India, Roy was a history lecturer at Presidency College and Sanskrit College, Calcutta. He was also appointed in the Bengal Education Service. During this tenure, he protested against the Rowlatt Act and resigned from the Bengal Education Service.
After his resignation, Roy went to England again for legal training at the Lincoln’s Inn. However, he did not complete the course.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
After returning from England, Roy joined the Congress party. He also taught at the ‘National College’ (Kolkata Vidyapitha). He later became the Vice Chancellor of the National University (known at that time as Gauriya Sarba-Vidyayatan).
In 1921, Roy became actively involved in the Indian nationalist movement and participated in the non-cooperation movement under the leadership of CR Das (a political activist and founder of the Swaraj party). During this period, he was detained by the British authorities for writing a seditious article.
Inspired by CR Das, Roy joined the Swaraj party (1922) – the party was formed in protest of Gandhi calling off the non-cooperation movement. He was appointed as the secretary of the Swaraj Party (1923). During the 1920s he was elected to the Bengal Council, for two consecutive terms. Roy was also elected to the Bengal Legislative Assembly (1937).
Roy was arrested for leading a protest march in Calcutta during the civil disobedience movement in 1930.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Roy was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 on a Congress party ticket. He did not actively engage in the Constituent Assembly debates.
Later Contributions
After partition, for a brief period Roy was the Leader of the Congress party in the East Bengal Legislative Assembly. He later resigned and was appointed as the Home Minister of West Bengal on 4 March 1948.
He passed away soon after on 20 February 1949.
Key Writings
Roy was interested in Bengali literature and served as a member of the Sabuj Patra– a literature group led by Pramatha Chowdhury. Roy published essays and short stories in the Sabuj Patra, Prabasi and Atmasakti. He even published a collection of short stories under the title of Sapta Parna.


 



Resources


Kiron Sankar Roy (Banglapedia)


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















