






























How Do We Engage With Our Constitution? - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?


 



Workshop
How Do We Engage With Our Constitution?
Varsha Nair and Tanya Kini









										17 Sep																			

2022


Workshop



 Venue
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai


Share








Workshop at TISS, Mumbai

On 17 September, 2022, the ConstitutionofIndia.net team at CLPR conducted a workshop with a group of LLM students at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai (TISS). The workshop introduced the students to Indian Constitutional History. The students were also guided on how to use the ConstitutionofIndia.net website and the comprehensive database of Indian Constitution historical resources, and how these sources are critical to understand the social and political origins of the Indian Constitution. The students specifically engaged with issues related to Freedom of Speech through these resources.
CLPR resource person Vineeth introduced the students to Historical Constitutions
The presentation began with a video of the Sabarimala case (whether women of all ages would be allowed to enter the Sabarimala temple) being referred to a larger bench at the Supreme Court. CLPR resource person, Vineeth Krishna, highlighted how the lawyers used the Constituent Assembly Debates to interpret the concept of ‘untouchability’. This formed the introduction of the Constituent Assembly Debates to the students.
A brief description of the makeup of the Constituent Assembly was given, including the size of the Assembly and the duration of the debates. Next, a video of a fictional depiction of one of the Constituent Assembly Debates – on the issue of having a national language – was shown to give a sense of the principal role that these Debates played and continue to play in understanding Indian History and Law.
Vineeth then introduced the students to the constitutional imagination that existed before 1946—prior to when the Constituent Assembly sat for deliberations. The students were surprised to know that there was in fact a robust constitutional imagination before 1946. He took the students through Historical Constitutions such as the Karachi Resolution 1931 and Government of India Act 1935 to give them a sense of the many experiments in constitution writing and also the many sources of inspiration for our current Constitution. The presentation closed with the students watching a CLPR video on the making of the Indian Constitution.
Students solving the worksheet
The final hour of the Workshop was devoted to a carefully designed worksheet on freedom of speech, which the students had to solve using the primary materials on ConstitutionofIndia.net. This pedagogic exercise helped the students locate the idea of freedom of speech in the Constitution of India and track the Constituent Assembly Debates that were fundamental to the framing of these free speech provisions. The student discussions that followed spotlighted the intricacies of navigating primary materials on constitutional history. It also brought forward student perspectives on whether freedom of speech can be restricted and on what grounds.
The CLPR team with the students and faculty of TISS Mumbai


Resources
Indian Constitutional History Workshop Slides 2022
Freedom of Speech Worksheet 2022



Suggested Reading


How a 1934 U.S. Case Shaped the Press Freedom Debate in the Assembly



Article 19: Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of Speech, etc.



The Tamil Nadu Governor and Constitutional Conventions






More in events





 Film Screening



“The Advocate” | Film Screening & Discussion
 Centre for Law and Policy Research



Event Report


26 Jan
2019







 Workshop



Indian Constitutional History Workshop
 National School of Journalism and Public Discourse, Bangalore



Event Report


25 Jun
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















