






























Maulana Abul Kalam Azad - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Maulana Abul Kalam Azad


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad
1888 - 1958




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Arabic
Education: No Formal Education



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasSub-Committee on Fundamental Rights+1 moreSub-Committee on Minorities 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad was born with the name of Abul Kalam Ghulam Muhiyuddin on November 11th 1888 in Mecca, Saudi Arabia. His father Maulana Khairuddin was a renowned Islamic scholar who brought Azad under his tutelage in his early years.
Azad however was inspired by the modernist writings of Sir Syed Ahmed Khan. In his teenage years, he transformed into a dynamic journalist and published Al-Hilal, a Calcutta based Urdu newspaper that was subsequently banned by the British authorities. An active participant in politics from his youth, he became the president of the Indian National Congress on two occasions – in 1923 and in 1940.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Azad was a very active leader of the Indian independence movement. He was a brief but active participant in the Khilafat Movement (1920-24), in the midst of which he held the post of the president of the All-India Khilafat Committee.
After the Khilafat Movement Azad was inspired by Mahatma Gandhi, and actively participated in his civil disobedience initiatives namely the Dandi March (1930) and the Quit India Movement (1942). He was imprisoned at several instances during the period between 1920-1945. He was involved in the negotiations for independence with the British, wherein he vehemently opposed the partition.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Azad was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress ticket. He was a member of five different Committees and intervened in the debate around national language and education. Though he did not speak much in the Assembly, as a senior party leader he was a key part of the internal deliberations that went on behind the scenes and in the various Committees.
Later Contributions
After independence, Azad was appointed as the Education Minister, a post that he went on to hold for a decade until 1958 in the Cabinet of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. He was monumental in establishing the Indian Council for Cultural Relation (ICCR) to secure cultural exchange between India and the Eastern Countries.
Azad died on February 22, 1958. He was posthumously awarded the Bharat Ratna in the year 1992 in recognition of his efforts as a freedom fighter, journalist, scholar, and poet.
Key Writings:
Azad was proficient in several languages, including Arabic, Hindi, English, Urdu, Persian and Bengali. He wrote many books but is best known for the posthumously published An Autobiographical Narrative. Other important books include Gubar-e-Khatir, Azad on Pakistan, and Tazkirah.


 



Key Speeches



Azad forcefully argued that English should continue as the national language as it served as the linguistic bridge between the north and south, and was a more inclusive choice than Hindi, at least for the time being.



 



Resources



Maulana Abul Kalam Azad by Abdul Qavi Desnavi (Sahitya Akademi, 1991)
The Educational Ideas of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad by G. Rasool Abduhu (Sterling Publishers, 1973)
Abul Kalam Azad: An Intellectual and Religious Biography by Ian Henderson Douglas (Oxford University Pres, 1993)
Maulana Azad, Islam and the National Movement by Syeda Saiyidain Hameed (Oxford University Press, 2014)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















