






























Naziruddin Ahmad - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Naziruddin Ahmad


 



Constituent Assembly Members
Naziruddin Ahmad
1889 - 




Key Information

Party: All-India Muslim League
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Naziruddin Ahmad was born on 25 December 1889 in Kulia village, Burdwan district (present-day West Bengal). He did his schooling at Hooghly Collegiate School and Burdwan Raj School. He obtained a law degree from Ripon Law College (renamed Surendranath Law College), University of Calcutta.
Ahmad had vibrant careers in law, politics, journalism and civil society. He practiced law at the Calcutta High Court and later the Federal Court of India. In 1924, he became the Public Prosecutor for Burdwan District, a post he held until 1928. His first foray into politics was from Burdwan Municipality when he was elected its Vice-Chairman in 1919.
He was Secretary of the Burdwan Muhammedan Association that aimed to advance modern education within the Bengal Muslim Community and protect its interests
Ahmad was the founder-editor of Burdwan Vani, a weekly Bengali newspaper.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Ahmad was an active member of the Praja movement in West Bengal, a pro-peasant movement that fought for labour rights. He was Secretary of the Bengal Raiyat Association – a farmers’ collective. In 1921 he wrote an open letter to the Governor of Bengal exhorting him to tour rural Bengal and witness the plight of the peasantry.
Later, he became a member of the Bengal Legislative Council, where he served as Chief Whip under Fazlul Huq’s Coalition Government in 1943.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ahmad was elected to the Constituent Assembly on a Muslim League ticket from West Bengal. He intervened in the debates on national language and reservations for minorities


 



Key Speeches



Ahmad believed that modern India could not have just one official language.
He argued against reservations for Muslims in the legislatures as it could perpetuate the unpleasant memory of separate electorates introduced by the British rule.
Famously, Ahmad aggressively attacked the Drafting Committee, cheekily terming it the ‘Drifting Committee’, alleging that the Committee was making last minute changes to the Constitution without the Assembly’s approval



 



Resources


Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India).


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















