






























P. C. Ghosh - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										P. C. Ghosh


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
P. C. Ghosh
1891 - 1983




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Doctorate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography


 





Biography


Early Life
Prafulla Chandra Ghosh was born on 24 December 1891 in Dhaka. Ghosh completed his schooling in his village and then moved to Dhaka, where he pursued a degree in Chemistry (1913). After completing his Masters in Chemistry (1916), he joined Dhaka University to conduct research in this field. In 1920, he was awarded a doctorate in chemistry by the Calcutta University.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Ghosh had a keen interest in the Swadeshi Movement but chose to focus on his education. Around 1913, when he was working for the Damodar flood relief, Ghosh got acquainted with Surendranath Banerjee which rekindled his interest in the nationalist movement. Followed by this interaction, he was inspired by Gandhi’s speech at Dhaka in December 1920 and joined India’s independence movement.
Not much is known about his role in the movement.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ghosh was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bengal Presidency on a Congress party ticket. He did not actively participate in the Assembly debates.
Later Contributions
Ghosh was elected to the West Bengal Legislative Assembly (1947) and was appointed as West Bengal’s first chief minister. However, due to internal disputes within the Congress party, he had to step down as Chief Minister in 1948.
Ghosh was elected again as an independent candidate to the West Bengal Legislative Assembly in 1967 and was allocated the Department of Food. Ghosh was heavily criticised by the United Front Committee for his failure to handle the food shortage crisis during the 1967 drought. Later in the year, he resigned from the government and formed a new party – Progressive Democratic Front (PDF). PDF started to get support from other assembly members and by the end of November, 1967 Ghosh had enough supporters to form the government. However, this did not last for long and the assembly was dissolved in 1968.
He passed away on 18 December 1983.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















