






























Desk Brief: The 25th Amendment - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: The 25th Amendment


 
















Desk Brief: The 25th Amendment



Blog



Editorial Team






30 November 2021

Share









 
(This Brief is part of a series that highlights the context, content, and effect of important constitutional amendments that were passed in India after we enacted our Constitution)
The Constitution (Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Act 1971 was passed by Parliament on 20 April 1972. This aimed to reverse the Supreme Court’s ruling in R.C. Cooper v. Union of India (1970), also popularly known as the bank nationalization case. It amended Article 31 and introduced a new Article 31C, effectively preventing citizens from challenging laws relating to the acquisition of property.
Article 31 provided for a fundamental right to property. It stated that any person whose property was acquired by the Government was entitled to compensation. Since 1954, the Supreme Court consistently held that under Article 31, if the Government acquired property, it had to pay compensation equivalent to its market value. Parliament responded by passing the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act 1955 which prohibited people from challenging the acquisition of their properties on the grounds of inadequate compensation. However, the Court continued to uphold its position in subsequent cases.
In 1969, the Indira Gandhi Government nationalized 14 private banks and passed legislation to this effect. Rustom Cavasjee Cooper, a shareholder in one of these banks, challenged this legislation before the Supreme Court. He argued that the legislation did not give him adequate compensation, therefore violating his fundamental right to property under Article 31, and freedom to carry on a business under Article 19(1)(g). The Court agreed with Cooper and passed a judgment striking down the relevant portion of the legislation. This triggered Parliament to pass the 25th Amendment to overturn the decision in R.C. Cooper.
The Amendment replaced the word ‘compensation’ in Article 31(2) with ‘amount’ which could be fixed by law. This meant that if the Government acquired the property from citizens, it could pay a nominal amount. The Amendment also stated that this ‘amount’ could not be challenged in Court. Finally, it stated that the acquisition of the property would supersede the fundamental right to carry on a business or trade under Article 19(1)(g); therefore, any acquisition could not be challenged solely because it violates this right.
The Amendment also inserted Article 31C. This Article stated that any law which was passed to implement the objectives under Article 39(b) and (c) – which are Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSPs)– could not be challenged or reviewed by the Court for violating fundamental rights. This was an instance of the tussle between the Court and Parliament on the constitutional meaning of and the relationship between fundamental rights and DPSPs.
Eventually, the 44th Amendment deleted the right to property as a fundamental right. Instead, it became a constitutional right under Article 300A, which does not mention compensation.
The Hindi translation of this Desk Brief can be found here.

Tags Nationalisation of BanksRight to Property 








Suggested Reading


Four More Teams Qualify, Stage is Set for ConQuest Grand Finale on 25 October










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















