






























Vineeth Krishna Archives - Constitution of India




















































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 


Blog posts by: Vineeth Krishna






Borrowing Battles: Kerala’s Curious Reliance on Constitutional History
24 April 2024 • By Vineeth Krishna



 7 mins					






B.R. Ambedkar’s Defence of Constitutional Borrowing
18 April 2024 • By Vineeth Krishna
Ambedkar defends the Constitution's borrowing by highlighting its global alignment and need for adaptation to national requirements. He refutes claims of blind imitation, emphasizing the document's original variations tailored to India's needs.


 3 mins					






Ambedkar’s Challenge to the Republic
12 April 2024 • By Vineeth Krishna
Ambedkar was optimistic about constitutional democracy working in India. However, by 1953, he had lost hope.


 4 mins					






The Einstein-Nehru Exchange on Israel and Palestine
20 March 2024 • By Vineeth Krishna
Albert Einstein's remarkable letter to Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru was a spirited attempt to sway him towards endorsing an Israeli state. Nehru however, was not convinced. 


 4 mins					






The Women’s Indian Association and Indian Constitutional Thought
12 March 2024 • By Vineeth Krishna
Unlike the American constitutional founding, which was exclusively led by men, the Indian Constituent Assembly included women. Until recently, the contributions and even the presence of these women were overlooked in public memory.


 6 mins					






This Month in Constitution-Making (January 1947): The Constituent Assembly passes the Objectives Resolution
4 January 2024 • By Vineeth Krishna
After a month of uncertainty, the Constituent Assembly passed Nehru's Objective Resolution, marking the start of Indian constitution-making


 4 mins					






Beyond Legal Legitimacy: How to Better Engage with Judgments
21 December 2023 • By Vineeth Krishna
This piece explores various dimensions in evaluating Supreme Court judgments, including legal, moral, and sociological legitimacy, with a focus on the significance of moral perspectives in judicial discourse.


 3 mins					






This Month in Constitution Making (Nov 1949): Drafting Committee Comes Under Fire
16 November 2023 • By Vineeth Krishna
In November 1949, as the Assembly reviewed its nearly three-year-long efforts, some members launched an attack on the Drafting Committee.


 2 mins					






This Month in Constitution Making (September 1945): Newly-elected Labour Party announces a Constituent Assembly for India
4 September 2023 • By Vineeth Krishna
How did the results of the 1945 UK General election have cascading effects on the setting up of two separate constitution-making bodies in India and Pakistan respectively?


 3 mins					






This Month in Constitution Making (June 1934): Congress Makes The First Official Demand For A Constituent Assembly
13 June 2023 • By Vineeth Krishna
In a historic moment in June 1934, the Indian National Congress, for the first time, officially demanded an Indian Constituent Assembly to frame India's Constitution. In a span of a few years, this demand transformed into the cornerstone of India's freedom movement.


 3 mins					






Founding of India’s Republic: Continuity or Departure from Civilisation?
1 June 2023 • By Vineeth Krishna
The Sengol ceremony during the new parliament's inauguration was an attempt to depict India's founding as a continuation of its civilizational heritage. Did the Founders perceive India's transformation in similar vein?


 4 mins					






Delhi and Washington D.C. : The Two Capitals’ Pursuit of Self-Governance
19 May 2023 • By Vineeth Krishna
Longstanding conflicts over the control of a nation's capital city between national and state governments are not exclusive to India. This piece draws parallels between India and the United States, examining the historical debates and current developments surrounding self-government their capital cities.


 5 mins					






Bhagat Singh Hanged, Karachi Resolution Passed
23 March 2023 • By Vineeth Krishna
On 23 March 1931 the British hanged Bhagat Singh for his involvement in the Lahore Conspiracy Case. Just a week later, the the Indian National Congress  passed the iconic Karachi Resolution 1931. Were these two historic events connected?


 3 mins					






Should Courts Review Delimitation?
22 March 2023 • By Vineeth Krishna
There are allegations that the recent delimitation exercises have redrawn constituency boundaries to give an advantage to a particular political party. Should courts intervene?


 4 mins					






How did Ambedkar and Gandhi imagine Indian Federalism?
13 October 2022 • By Siddharth Jha and Vineeth Krishna
B.R. Ambedkar's and M.K. Gandhi's contrasting views on the caste system, have garnered wide attention. Here, we compare their views on an important constitutional design feature: Federalism.


 3 mins					






Chileans Overwhelmingly Reject a New Progressive Constitution
12 September 2022 • By Vineeth Krishna
In September 2022, the Chilean population voted to reject the Draft of a new Chilean Constitution. What does the rejection of a highly progressive draft constitution mean for future constitution-making projects?


 4 mins					






Transfer of Power: The Delayed Announcement of the Boundaries of India and Pakistan
30 August 2022 • By Vineeth Krishna and Varsha Nair
On the evening of 13 August 1947, Sir Cyril Radcliffe submitted a report to the Viceroy of India, Lord Mountbatten, that settled the territorial boundaries of India and Pakistan, referred to as the Commissions' ‘awards’. The British archives reveal why there was a delay in the publication of the awards.


 2 mins					






This Month in Constitution Making (July 1947): Constituent Assembly Reacts to India’s Partition
11 July 2022 • By Vineeth Krishna
In this desk brief, we break down the reactions to the announcement of Partition in the Indian Constituent Assembly.


 3 mins					






How a 1934 U.S. Case Shaped the Press Freedom Debate in the Assembly
28 June 2022 • By Varsha Nair and Vineeth Krishna
How was the debate on the Seventh Schedule of the Draft Constitution of India 1948 influenced by U.S. case law?


 3 mins					






Why India’s Constitution Framers Hated the Sedition Law
13 May 2022 • By Vineeth Krishna
The views of 'sedition' from our Constitution framers as compared to present day.


 2 mins					






This Month in Constitution Making (May 1949): India Decides to Remain in the Commonwealth of Nations
4 May 2022 • By Vineeth Krishna
How Nehru ended up convincing the Constituent Assembly to join the Commonwealth Group of Nations.


 3 mins					






Workers’ Rights in M.N. Roy’s Constitution of Free India : A Draft (1944)
2 May 2022 • By Vineeth Krishna
We examine the provisions of the Constitution of Free India: A Draft (1944).


 2 mins					






This Month in Constitution Making (April 1947): Princely States Join the Constituent Assembly
6 April 2022 • By Vineeth Krishna
How did the group of Princely States join the Union of India?


 3 mins					






How A 1933 U.S. Law Shaped India’s Financial Emergency Provision
25 February 2022 • By Kalyani Menon and Vineeth Krishna
What was the impact of FDR's actions during the Great Depression on the Indian Constituent Assembly?


 2 mins					






This Month in Constitution-Making (February 1947): Britain Announces It Will Quit India
9 February 2022 • By Vineeth Krishna
The background behind the announcement of Britain quitting India in February 1947.


 2 mins					






Finding Bose in the Indian Constitution
26 January 2022 • By Sudhir Krishnaswamy and Vineeth Krishna
How did the views of Subhas Chandra Bose manifest in the Constituent Assembly Debates?


 2 mins					






This Month in Constitution-Making (November 1946): Was The Constituent Assembly Valid Despite Muslim League Absence?
8 November 2021 • By Vineeth Krishna
Did the absence of the Muslim League from the Indian Constituent Assembly test its validity of existence?


 3 mins					






This Month In Constitution Making (October, 1949): Constituent Assembly Adds Contempt of Court to Free Speech Limitations
5 October 2021 • By Vineeth Krishna
Why did TT Krishnamachari want to add 'contempt of court' as a constraint to the Fundamental right of Freedom of speech?


 2 mins					






This Month in Constitution-Making (September 1949): Constituent Assembly Settles on a Name for the Union
20 September 2021 • By Vineeth Krishna
Read about how our Constitution framers debated on the naming of the country as per Article 1 of the Constitution of India 1950


 2 mins					














We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















