






























Desk Brief: What Counts as Forced Labour? - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: What Counts as Forced Labour?


 
















Desk Brief: What Counts as Forced Labour?



Blog



Editorial Team






31 December 2021

Share









 
Earlier this month, the world observed 2 December as the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery. This marked the 72nd anniversary of an important United Nations Convention in 1949.
Exactly a year earlier, the Indian Constituent Assembly took up Draft Article 17 (Article 23 Constitution of India 1950) for discussion. The Draft Article stated that ‘Traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of forced labour are prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offense punishable in accordance with the law.’
Kazi Syed Karimmuddin wanted the Draft Article to explicitly mention ‘slavery’. Damodar Swarup Seth proposed to add the term ‘serfdom’ which he said could capture all kinds of slavery in India. K.T. Shah felt that slavery was an inadequate term – it only captured one strand of forced labour: the buying and selling of human being as labour. It did not encompass practices like devadasi, begar, and prostitution.
It appears that the Assembly agreed with Shah. It did not add slavery to the Draft Article and stuck with ‘traffic in human beings’, ‘begar’, and ‘other forms of forced labour’ to account for a wide spectrum of forced labour that existed in India.
A year later, on 2 December 1949, 25 countries including India signed the United Nations Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others. The Convention seemed to reduce forced labour to the traffic of women – a narrow conception of forced labour compared to our Constitution framers.
This however changed in 1985 when a United Nations working group report proposed to observe 2 December as the World Day for the Abolition of Slavery. Since then, the U.N. observes this day to bring the world’s attention to forced labour. It now views forced labour more comprehensively to include a range of practices like forced marriage, forced recruitment of children in armed conflict, debt bondage, and human trafficking.

Tags Indian Constituent AssemblyAbolition of Slavery 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















