






























Raj Bahadur - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Raj Bahadur


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Raj Bahadur
1912 - 1990




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Rajasthan
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Raj Bahadur was born on 21st August 1912 in Bharatpur (present day Rajasthan, India). He completed his education at Sadar High School, Bharatpur; Maharaja’s High School and College, Jaipur, Agra College and St. Johns’ College, Agra and got his M.A., B.Sc. and LL.B degrees.
He was associated with Hindustan Socialist Republican Army from 1929-1930. Bahadur was a member of the Central Advisory Committee, Bharatpur State from 1939 to 1942 and was associated with the Bharatpur Praja Parishad Party which was affiliated to the All India States People’s Conference from 1939 to 1948. He became the Municipal Commissioner of Bharatpur State from 1941 to 1942. Bahadur was the Secretary and later the Vice-President of Bharatpur State Praja Praishad from 1943 to 1947. He was also a member of the Rajasthan Pradesh Congress Committee since its inception.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Bahadur actively participated in the freedom struggle and he led the Indian Independence movement in the Bharatpur State (now Rajasthan) from 1940-41 to 1947. He was arrested twice.
Contribution to Constitution Making
He was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Rajasthan, Bharatpur through the Congress Party. He made interventions about the control and eradication of beggary, fee structure of the High Court, acquisition or requisitioning of property, to include the words ‘dangerously inflammable” and ‘corrosive or explosive’ and the importance of cinematograph films.
Later Contributions
Bahadur was the General Secretary of Matsya Union Congress Committee from 1948 to 1949. He was the member of the Rajasthan Pradesh Congress Committee since its inception. He was the President of Bharatpur Bar Association from 1948 to 1951.Bahadur was the member of the Provisional Parliament from 1950 to 1952 and the Secretary of the Congress Party in the Parliament from 1950 to 1952. He was the Deputy Minister of Communications from 1951 to 1956.
He also was the member of the First Lok Sabha from 1952 to 1957; Second Lok Sabha from 1957 to 1962, the Third Lok Sabha from 1962 to 1967 and the All Indian Congress Committee from 1952 to 1967.
He was a Minister in the Ministry of Communications from February 1956 to December 1956; the Minister of Communications from December 1956 to April 1957; the Minister of State in the Ministry of Transport & Communications from 1957 to 1962; the Minister for Shipping in the Ministry of Transport & Communications from 1962 to 1963; the Minister for Transport in charge of Shipping, Transport, Civil Aviation and Tourism from August 1963 to January 1966; the Minister of Information & Broadcasting from January 1966 to February 1967; the Ambassador for India in Nepal from January 1968 to January 1971 and was appointed as the Cabinet Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Shipping & Transport on March 18, 1971.
He organised several social upliftment and welfare work amongst the backward classes and campaigned against begar (forced labour) in Bharatpur State.


 



Key Speeches



He spoke about the amendment to include the control and eradication of beggary in the Union list.
He suggested the need to make the fee structure in every High Court uniform.
He made interventions about the acquisition or requisitioning of property for the purposes of the Union.
He suggested to the assembly to legislate with respect to the possession, storage, transport and sale of acids and to include the words ‘dangerously inflammable’ and ‘corrosive or explosive’ as acids have been misused even in ordinary disputes.
He highlighted the importance of cinematograph films in the formation and moulding of national character.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















