






























Ramnarayan Singh - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Ramnarayan Singh


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Ramnarayan Singh
1885 - 1964




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress, Independent
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate, High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Ramnarayan Singh was born in the year 1885 in Hazaribagh’s Tetariya village, located in present day Jharkhand. His early school education was done at the village schools of Tetaria and Chhotki Jhori. Subsequently, he went to the Upper Primary School at Hunterganj, the Middle Vernacular School in Jhori and finally the Zilla School in Hazaribagh. After finishing his Intermediate studies from St, Xavier’s college Calcutta, Singh pursued a B.A. degree from the city’s Ripon College. After undergraduation, he took up a law degree at the Patna Law College.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Singh was a dedicated Congress party political worker much of his early life. He served as the Secretary and President of the Chatra Sub-Divisional Congress Committee until 1924. Briefly, in 1924, he was elected Vice-Chairman of the Hazaribagh District Board. Between 1925-46 he was the President of the Hazaribagh District Congress Committee. Singh also remained a long-term member of the Bihar Pradesh Congress Committee and the All India Congress Committee. In 1927 he was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly and continued to be a member until 1946. 
Singh is identified as one of the prominent freedom fighters from the Chotanagpur region. His participation in the Freedom Movement gave him the title, ‘Chotanagpur Kesri’. He is also often referred to as Babu Ramnarayan Singh. Between 1921 and 1944, Singh went to jail multiple times for his anti-British activities, serving up to a two-year long imprisonment in 1942. 
Singh was a devoted Gandhian for most of his life. He was deeply involved in the Bangam Manjhi led reform movements among the Santals of Hazaribagh. Singh, alongside a few other Congress workers like Krishna Ballabh Sahay, was instrumental in steering the movement along the Gandhian line. The British then arrested him for his ‘anti-government activities’ and put him behind bars for a year. During his time as the President of the Hazaribagh Congress Committee, Singh was the torchbearer for Khadi and Charkha Spinning. He put in huge efforts to spread Khadi work in Hazaribagh by introducing them in schools, holding Charkha demonstrations and organising Khadi exhibitions. 
Contribution to Constitution Making
Singh was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Bihar Province on a Congress Party ticket. He was quite vocal in the Assembly and often brought the Gandhian perspective in the Assembly discussions. He was distressed by the absence of Panchayats in the Constitution, expressed discontent about party politics in India and intervened in the debates on the fifth schedule and the role of civil servants in an independent India.  
Later Contributions
After India’s independence, Singh moved away from the Congress. He contested the 1952 elections as an independent candidate and won from the Hazaribagh-West constituency in Bihar. 
Though the specific reasons for his exit from Congress are unclear, one can glean that it might have to do with his displeasure in the way the Party was becoming subservient to the Central Government. Sometime after his departure from the Party and subsequent electoral victory, he wrote a long letter addressed to U.N Dhebar, the then Congress President, criticising the way Jawaharlal Nehru had moulded Congress into a tool to garner support for the existing government.  
Singh passed away in 1964.   
  


 



Key Speeches



He was fiercely opposed to the creation of separate provisions for the administration and control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes. He believed that by introducing the fifth schedule, the Constituent Assembly was advocating discriminatory administration that the leaders of the Freedom Movement had rejected during British rule. 
He felt that by placing too many restrictions on amendments to the Constitution, the Assembly was being unjust to future generations. He insisted that in a democracy, it must be possible to make any decision through a simple majority.  
When the Assembly discussed the future privileges of members of the Civil Service, he was uncertain why Civil Servants have to be given such guarantees after independence. He argued that they had previously been loyal to the British Government and had not shown any change in their behaviour to be given such safeguards for their future.  
He was worried that the Constitution was concentrating all power with the Centre and thereby, taking away the power from the villages. 



 



Resources


Members Bioprofile (Lok Sabha) 


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















