






























Committee Reports - Constitution of India
























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
										Committee Reports


 


Committee Reports


Committee reports are key documents drafted by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members appointed by the Constituent Assembly itself. These reports contained initial drafts of various provisions of the Constitution and regulated the membership and procedures of the Assembly. A significant portion of the Assembly's plenary debates revolved around specific Committee reports. Alongside the plenary debates, these reports are critical to understand India's constitution-making process.


 





Draft Constitution prepared by the Constitutional Adviser
1 October 1947

This was the first draft constitution prepared by the B.N Rau, K.M Munshi, Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar, and D.P Khaitan which was used as the basic document by the Drafting Committee.




Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Citizenship Clause
01 May 1947






Report of the Union Constitution Committee
4 July, 1947






Report of the advisory committee on the subject of certain political safeguards for minorities
11 May 1949 

The advisory committee on the subject of certain political safeguards for minorities was appointed on 24 February 1948 under Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel as the chairman and four other members. 




Second Report of the Union Powers Committee
5 July, 1947






Report of the Committee on Functions of the Constituent Assembly
25 August, 1947

The Committee on Functions of the Constituent Assembly was appointed on 20 August 1947, to report on the functions of the Constituent Assembly.




Expert Committee on Financial Provisions
5 December, 1947

The Expert Committee on Financial Provisions was appointed on 5 December 1947, to study the financial provisions of the Constitution.




Second Report of the Order of Business Committee
9 July, 1947






First Report of the Order of Business Committee
27 April 1947






Report of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure
20 December 1946

The Committee on the Rules of Procedure was appointed on 10 December 1946, to formulate the rules under which the Constituent Assembly would conduct its business.




Report of the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights
16 April 1947

This Report was the first version of what would become our Constitution's Fundamental Rights chapter. It contained 45 Articles including rights to equality, freedom, religion and constitutional remedies.




First Report of the Union Powers Committee
17 April 1947

The Union Powers Committee was appointed on 25 January 1947, to examine the scope and content of the subjects assigned to the Union under the Cabinet Mission Plan.




Report of the States Committee
24 April 1947

This Report described the agreement worked out with the Princely States regarding their representation in the Constituent Assembly.




Report of the Sub-Committee on Minorities
27 July 1947

The Sub-Committee on Minorities was one of the five sub-committees appointed by the larger Advisory Committee.




Report of the Advisory Committee on the Subject of Minority Rights
8 August 1947

This Report was prepared by the Advisory Committee, based on the suggestions of the Sub-Committee on Minorities.




Joint Report Of The Excluded And Partially Excluded Areas (Other Than Assam) And The North-East Frontier (Assam) Tribal And Excluded Areas Sub-Committee
25 August 1947

The Joint Report was prepared by the two sub-committees under the parent Advisory Committee which dealt with Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas.




Report of the Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas (Other than Assam) Sub-Committee
September 1947

The Sub-Committee on Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas was one of the five sub-committees appointed by the larger Advisory Committee.




Report of the Committee on Chief Commissioner's Provinces
21 October 1947

This Report recommended suitable constitutional changes for the administration of the Chief Commissioners' Provinces in Independent India.




Draft Constitution of India 1948
21 February 1948

The Drafting Committee submitted a Draft Constitution of India, containing 315 Articles, to the President of the Constituent Assembly on 21 February 1948.














We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















