






























Desk Brief: 2021 with Constitutionofindia.net - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: 2021 with Constitutionofindia.net


 
















Desk Brief: 2021 with Constitutionofindia.net



Blog



Editorial Team






31 January 2022

Share









 
We thought it would be great if the first 2022 desk brief took a step back and reviewed 2021 through a curated set of Constitutionofindia.net pieces. So here goes!
The first few weeks of 2021 saw the farmers’ protest against the farm laws become increasingly vocal and intense, attracting wide political and media attention. In our first 2021 desk brief, we provided an overview of farmers’ movements in Indian history and pointed out that such agrarian mobilizations often folded themselves into the larger independence and constitutional reform movements.
The farmers’ protests, which were, for the most part, concentrated on the borders of Delhi, made their way to the centre of the city on 26 January, clashing with police and casting a shadow on India’s republic day celebrations. Seventy-one years ago, the mood was quite different in Delhi when India celebrated its first Republic Day. We tried to give our readers a sense of that moment and the world’s reaction to India transforming into a constitutional republic.
In March, we celebrated Women’s Day through a special series. This included the story of Sophia Duleep Singh – popularly known as the ‘Suffragette Princess’, an Indian woman who campaigned for women’s voting rights in Britain. We also looked at Dakshayani Velayudhan, the only Dalit woman in the Constituent Assembly and its youngest member. She had a rather distinct view on political safeguards for the Dalit community.
Speaking of safeguards, an unvaccinated Indian population had little to none when the second wave of COVID-19 swept India and wreaked havoc. Around the same time, India slowly began its vaccination drive. The Union’s vaccine procurement strategy attracted wide criticism for undermining federalism. We engaged with the issue through a piece that looked at federalism in the time of corona.
In August, the Union government was accused of conducting surveillance on politicians, activists and journalists. The ‘Pegasus Scandal’ rocked Parliament, triggered public furore and vindicated many concerns about the Indian State accessing citizens’ private correspondence and data. We looked at a debate in the Constituent Assembly around a proposal to include the right to privacy in the Indian Constitution.
Around the same time, the world was treated to the 2021 Tokyo Olympics. Much to our delight, the Indian men’s hockey team bagged a bronze medal. We took our readers back to 1928 when the Indian hockey team won a gold medal. The team was captained by Jaipal Singh Munda, a Constituent Assembly member and a leader of tribal rights movements in India. Notably, Singh had left his Indian Civil Service training, disobeying the Civil Services Authority, to participate in the Olympics. He was reprimanded and eventually resigned altogether.
The Indian Supreme Court heard an important case related to the civil service. Article 335 directs the State to consider SC/ST representation in making appointments to posts and services while maintaining administrative efficiency. We argued that unlike current debates around this Article, our Constitution framers did not view affirmative action and administrative efficiency as conflicting goals.
In November, India celebrated Constitution Day to commemorate the Constituent Assembly’s adoption of the Constitution. We provided our readers with a glimpse of the Assembly’s proceedings on that day.
Hope you enjoyed this review of 2021!

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















