






























B.N. Rau's 'Outlines of a New Constitution' - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										B.N. Rau’s ‘Outlines of a New Constitution’


 
















B.N. Rau’s ‘Outlines of a New Constitution’



Blog



Siddharth Jha






26 February 2023

Share









 

Sir Benegal Narsing Rau, born on the 26th of February 1887 in a small town in South Kanara district, played a key role in the making of our Constitution. In his long career as a civil servant and judge, he had earned a reputation of being a peerless administrator and expert on legal and constitutional matters.
For these reasons, he was an obvious choice for the role of constitutional adviser to the Constituent Assembly. Most scholarship focusses on his significant contributions to the Assembly — the collation of the various committees’ reports into a Draft Constitution, his travels around the world meeting with constitutional experts, and his critical interventions on the due process clause.
Sir B.N. Rau Image Credits: Hindustan Times
To commemorate B.N. Rau’s 136th anniversary, this piece draws attention to a document authored by Rau that has received relatively little attention: Outlines of a New Constitution. Rau drafted this document while he was at the Reforms Office in the Governor-General’s Secretariat in January 1946. This was during the immediate post-war years, with the situation clearly favouring an imminent transfer of power from the British to Indian hands. There was a lack of clarity, however, regarding the constitutional scheme through which this would be done.
The upcoming elections to the provincial legislatures were to be fought by the major political parties on the basis of contrasting political visions for India’s future. While the Indian National Congress emphasised the unity of the country and the necessity of immediate transfer of power, for the Muslim League the demand for a strong independent Pakistan was foremost. Thus, there was political and constitutional deadlock.
In this situation, Rau felt compelled to devise a practical solution that could reconcile, to the extent possible, the conflicting demands of the two major parties. Outlines was the result of this labour. In his own words, “The essence of the scheme is that while domination of one community by another is to be prevented, the unity of India is to be preserved for purposes equally beneficial to all.”
The plan put forward by Rau called for a federal ‘United States of India’ comprising of three types of territories: British Indian provinces, Frontier provinces, and the Princely States and tribal areas. The Frontier provinces effectively corresponded to the territories that the Muslim League claimed for Pakistan. Provinces would have autonomy in all matters except defence, external affairs, communications and the related finances.
Rau proposed that the British Provinces and Frontier Provinces should have equal representation, or parity, in the Union’s executive and legislature, regardless of their population and size. His aim was to prevent political power in the parliament and executive from being entirely dependent on numerical strength of various political groups. This was precisely what drove the demand for Pakistan, the fear that a Hindu political majority would result in Hindu political domination. Rau designed this representation scheme without mentioning religion, instead using the language of territory. He noted that this approach had succeeded in other politically sensitive regions, such as Austria-Hungary and Ireland.
Nehru, Mountbatten and Jinnah  Image Credits: Wikimedia Commons
Suman Sharma in State Boundary Changes in India, suggests that Rau’s paper had a significant influence on the Cabinet Mission proposals on the constitutional future of India. The Plan was similar to Rau’s in many ways: a strong federation with the Union in charge of only three subjects, indicating there might have been some influence.
Outlines was one of many attempts by political observers and actors of its day to resolve the political conflict in India through a distinct constitutional vision. What makes Outlines distinct is that it aimed for a more modest outcome of bringing the leaders of the League and Congress to the table, identifying the core concerns of both parties, and proposing a somewhat novel scheme of representation and federalism to address them.
Resources

Norms and Politics: Sir Benegal Narsing Rau in the Making of the Indian Constitution, 1935-50 by Arvind Elangovan, Oxford University Press, 2019
State Boundary Changes in India: Constitutional Provisions and Consequences by Suman Sharma, Deep & Deep Publications, 1995










Suggested Reading


B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights



B.R. Ambedkar’s Justification To Restrict Fundamental Rights










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Independence: A Tale of Two Declarations

14 August 2023
												• By Editorial Team

What impact did the American Declaration of Independence have on the Declaration of Purna Swaraj introduced by the Indian National Congress in 1930?


 3 mins										




 

5 Essential Writings on Constitution Making

07 September 2022
												• By Editorial Team

Here we highlight 5 works in the field of constitution making that help readers to understand the processes involved in this field.


 3 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















