






























Privacy Policy - Constitution of India



























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 








Privacy Policy
Effective Date: 1 October 2020
ConstitutionofIndia.net aims to create public awareness and enable active public engagement with India’s constitutional tradition. Through our website ConstitutionofIndia.net (‘Website’), we provide digitized and fully searchable versions of 24 Historical Constitutions and 166 days of the Constituent Assembly’s deliberations, short introductions to the Constituent Assembly process, biographies of key Constituent Assembly members and summaries of Constituent Assembly Debates on key constitutional provisions.
The privacy of our users is important to us. We encourage you to read this policy to understand how we collect, store, and use your data.
1. Scope
This Privacy Policy applies to all users of our Website and attendees of conferences, meetings, and other events held by ConstitutionofIndia.net.
2. Consent
By viewing or accessing any of the content on our Website, or signing up to attend any of our events, you consent to the collection, storage, and usage of your data as set out in this policy.
3. What Information Do We Gather?
a. If you are visiting our Website, you will not be required to reveal your identity or any personal information. However, your activities on our website may be tracked – please see the section “Cookies” for more information.
b. If you subscribe to our email updates, we will collect the following information: your first and last name, your email address, and your occupation.
c. If you register for an event, either online or physical, conducted by ConstitutionofIndia.net, we will collect the same information as we do from subscribers, as well as your gender, mobile number, and any other information deemed relevant for the purposes of this event.
4. How Will We Use Your Information?
a. We may use any information received from you for the purposes of sending you updates, or to contact you upon your own request and when otherwise necessary. This includes but is not limited to sharing information with you about events, new content, and any changes to our Website or this Privacy Policy.
b. We may also use this information to audit and improve our Website content and outreach. In certain circumstances (for instance, when making a funding proposal), we may share aggregated non-personal information with third-parties.
c. If, under any circumstances, we use a third-party to assist us in processing your information, we require that they comply with this Privacy Policy and take appropriate steps to preserve confidentiality and security.
d. We may share your information with third parties in certain limited circumstances, such as to comply with legal instructions, prevention of fraud or imminent harm, or preserve the integrity of our network.
e. If we propose to use your information for any purpose other than those outlined above, we will ensure that we notify you first. In this situation, you will have the opportunity to withhold or withdraw your consent for the use of your personal information.
5. Cookies
a. Our Website utilizes cookies and other tracking technologies to collect information about your activity on the Website. We use these technologies to track trends and statistics about our Website, allowing us to make decisions about how to improve our look and content.
b. Your browser will likely allow you to control whether or not allow cookies while using our Website.
c. The information recorded by cookies/tracking technologies can include your IP address, duration of use of the Website, information about how you accessed the Website, click path, and other information about your geographic location.
6. Confidentiality and Security
a. Any information that you share with us will be kept confidential and protected unless disclosure of the same is required or permitted by law.
b. If you do share any information with us, we will endeavour to follow industry-standard best practices in protecting it. All information will be securely stored within password-protected databases that can only be accessed by authorized personnel. However, as no method of electronic storage or transmission can guarantee 100% security, we cannot guarantee the absolute security of this information.
c. Only employees, agents, or consultants of ConstitutionofIndia.net who require access to this information in order to fulfil their professional duties, will have the right to use and access this information.
d. Your information may be shared with third-party service providers to enhance the services we provide to you – such as sharing content and updates via email. In this case, we will take reasonable measures to protect your information by entering into confidentiality agreements or other arrangements with these third-parties.
e. We will not sell or use your information for commercial gain without your consent.
7. Third-Party Websites
ConstitutionofIndia.net hyperlinks to a number of third-party sites, to ensure that users can verify the information on the Website. If you click on a link to a third-party site or otherwise leave our Website, we cannot accept any responsibility for the collection, storage, or use of your information by such third parties as a result of your visits or usage of that website. Instead, the collection, storage and use of the information will be governed by the privacy policy of that website. Please ensure that you go through the privacy policy of any third-party site linked to our Website, before providing any of your information.
8. Accuracy
We want to maintain accurate and current information of all our users and subscribers. If you need to update or correct any information that you have already shared with us, please contact us on cadindia@clpr.org.in and we will incorporate these changes as soon as practicable.
If you want to obtain the information we currently hold on you, please email cadindia@clpr.org.in and we will aim to share this information with you within fourteen (14) days of receipt of your email.
9. Amendments
If we update any aspects of this Privacy Policy, we will take every reasonable step to bring these changes to your attention by posting all changes prominently on our Website for a reasonable period of time. We may also use your information to contact you to notify you about any changes.
10. Disputes
a. Your use of this Website, and any disputes relating to privacy and personal information, are subject to this Privacy Policy. This Policy will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Republic of India.
b. Further, it is irrevocably and unconditionally agreed that the courts of Bengaluru, India shall have exclusive jurisdiction to entertain any proceedings in relation to any disputes arising out of the same.
In accordance with the Information Technology Act 2000, the name and the details of the Grievance Officer at ConstitutionofIndia.net is provided below.
Vineeth Krishna
Centre for Law and Policy Research
Email: vineeth.krishna@clpr.org.in















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















