






























Jagat Narain Lal - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Jagat Narain Lal


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Jagat Narain Lal
1894 - 1966




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress, Hindu Mahasabha
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Jagat Narain Lal was born on 21 July 1894 in a small town in Bihar. His family was constantly on the move, shifting from town to town. Lal was tutored at home for the most part, though he joined the formal education system for high school. In 1910, he graduated from Irwin Christian College and subsequently received his post-graduate degree in economics and law from Allahabad University.
In 1918, he began practicing law in Patna High Court while also teaching economics at Bihar Vidyapith. He wrote extensively on spirituality and politic. He served as the editor of ‘Mahavir’, a magazine till 1928.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Lal was a prominent Indian National Congress leader, particularly well-known in Bihar. Much like other leaders of the freedom struggle, he was arrested for participating in the Non-Cooperation, Civil Disobedience, and Quit India movements.
Lal was a Hindu Mahasabha member too and became its general secretary in 1926. In 1932, while in prison, Lal wrote a letter to B.S. Moonje, a Mahasabha leader, mulling over his dual membership of the Mahasabha and the Congress, explaining his essential agreement with the nationalism promoted by Congress under Gandhi.
He began to veer away from the Hindu Mahasabha in the 1930s, completely severing ties in 1937 when he contested the provincial assembly elections in Bihar on a Congress party ticket and defeated a Mahasabha candidate.
He joined the Servants of Hindu Society to continue working on the protection of Hindu interests.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Jagat Narain Lal was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bihar on a Congress party ticket. He intervened in multiple debates on varying issues such as freedom of the press, freedom of religion, reservations, and emergency powers of the President.
Later Contributions
Jagat Narain Lal was active in politics post-independence as well. He was a part of the Dar Commission appointed in 1948, to look into the feasibility and desirability of linguistic provinces. He was also elected to the Bihar Legislative Assembly, and served as the Minister for Law and Animal Husbandry under Sri Krishna Sinha.


 



Key Speeches



While discussing legislative powers to regulate newspapers, Lal argued that as an advanced country, India must guarantee full freedom of speech and expression for its citizens.
Lal observed that the Draft Constitution contained one of the widest clauses in the world guaranteeing freedom of religion which also enshrined the right to propagate religion. He proposed that to safeguard the interests of the majority religions, there was a need to prohibit the conversion of minor children.



 



Resources



The Dilemma of Jagat Narain Lal, Congress or the Hindu Mahasabha: Some Excerpts from Unpublished Letter of Jagat Narain Lal to Dr. Moonje from Hazarubagh Central Jail, March 1932, by Manish Sinha (Proceedings of Indian History Congress, 2015)
Light Unto a Cell, by Jagat Narain Lal (Hind Kitabs, 1947)
Competing Nationalisms: The Sacred and Political Life of Jagat Narain Lal, by Rajshree Chandra (Penguin, 2021)

 


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















