






























P. Kakkan - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										P. Kakkan


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
P. Kakkan
1909 - 1981




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Scheduled Caste
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
At 8: 45 a.m. on 8 July 1939, the entry of 5 dalits in the Meenakshi Amman temple in Madurai was a historical feat. Promoinent dalit leader, P. Kakkan along with Harijan Sevak Sangh led the group of people entering the temple despite severe opposition from upper-caste Hindus – marking a significant milestone in the temple entry movement. Kakkan was born on 13 June 1909 in Madurai.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Kakkan was well-known for his role in the freedom struggle and the Dalit rights movement. He was arrested for his involvement in the Quit India Movement in 1942, and sentenced to imprisonment for 1.5 years. He was involved in movements to empower Dalits and the backward classes from his youth.
Insprired by the Temple Entry Proclamation issued in 1936 in Travancore permitting entry of everybody irrespective of caste in temples, the temple entry movement gained momentum in Madras. In June 1939, members of the Madurai Congress inlcuding Kakkan founded a Temple Entry Propaganda Committee to enable the entry of members of lower caste communities to enter the Meenakshi temple. This culminated in the historical event described above. On 17 July 1939, the Chief Minister of Madras Presidency – C Rajagopalachari, passed the Madras Temple Entry Ordinance.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Kakkan was elected to the Constituent Assembly on a Congress party ticket from the Madras province. He intervened in the debates on separate electorates and reservations.
Later Contributions
In 1951, Kakkan was elected to the Lok Sabha from Madurai. An active member of the Congress party, he was appointed president of the Tamil Nadu Congress Committee in 1957. He was also a member of the Madras Legislative Assembly from 1957 to 1967.
Kakkan was a minister in two successive Tamil Nadu governments, where he held several important portfolios: public works (1957-62), agriculture (1962-63) and home affairs (1963-67). As a legislator and a member of the executive, he was celebrated as an honest and hardworking leader. One of his most noteworthy achievements as a minister was the construction of dams and the establishment of agricultural colleges in Tamil Nadu.
After his defeat in the 1967 elections against a DMK opponent, Kakkan retired from politics.
He passed away on 23rd December 1981. Kakkan is still regarded as an eminent leader, appreciated for his role in shaping dalit politics and agricultural reform in present day Tamil Nadu.


 



Key Speeches



Commenting on the Constitution as a whole, Kakkan spoke in favour of the joint electorate system as a means to abolish untouchability and eliminate differences,
He also endorsed the right of the State to make reservations for Dalits in government services under Draft Article 10 (Article 15).



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















