






























Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
1875 - 1950




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Gujarati
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Chairman: 
Provincial Constitution Committee 
Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded AreasProvincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Sardar Vallabhai Patel was born on 31st October 1875 and educated at Nadiad High School and the Middle Temple, London. He began his career as a barrister.
In 1917, his career in government took off with his election to Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation as the Sanitation Commissioner. He extended electricity, drainage and sanitation facility to all parts of the city and conducted major educational reforms including fighting for the recognition and payment of teachers. In 1920, Patel was nominated and elected as the President of the newly formed Gujarat Pradesh Congress Committee.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Patel was actively involved in the Non-Cooperation, Satyagraha and Quit India movements and was at various points arrested by the British. When Gandhi was imprisoned in 1923, he led and organised the Satyagraha movement in Nagpur.
All along, Patel rose within the Congress Party ranks and was elected as its President during the 1931 Karachi session, at which the Congress passed the historic Karachi Resolution.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Patel was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bombay on a Congress Party ticket. He was a member of the critical Advisory Committee and was more active in the Committee stages than the plenary debates. His interventions in the debates were concentrated in the early stages of constitution-making, particularly when the Assembly was considering the interim reports of the Sub-committees on Fundamental Rights and Minority Rights.
Later Contributions
During the framing of India’s Constitution, he was the Home and Information and Broadcasting Minister in the Interim Government and played a critical role in negotiating with and integrating the 565 princely states into the Union of India earning him the moniker ‘Iron Man of India’. As the first Home Minister and Deputy Prime Minister of independent India, he organized relief efforts for refugees. He held the post of Minister for States after July 1947 and Minister of Home and States after 1948.
Patel passed away on 15th December 1950.


 



Key Speeches



While discussing the final Report of the Minorities Committee on 26 May 1949, Patel expressed his satisfaction at the fact that the representatives of all the minority communities had eschewed separate electorates.



 



Resources



Sardar Vallabhai Patel: The Man Who United India by B Krishna (HarperCollins India, 2018).
The Sardar of India: Biography of Vallabhbhai Patel by Pran Nath Chopra (Allied Publishers, 1995)
Patel: A Life by Rajmohan Gandhi (Navajivan Publishing House, 1991).
India’s Bismarck: Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel by Balraj Krishna (Indus Source Books, 2007).



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















