






























A. Ramaswamy Mudaliar - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										A. Ramaswamy Mudaliar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
A. Ramaswamy Mudaliar
1887 - 1976




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Mysore
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Ramaswamy Mudaliar was born on 14th October 1887 in Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh. Along with his twin brother, he obtained his undergraduate degree from the Madras Christian College. At College, he read ardently and organised student debates. Later, he went on to obtain a law degree from the Madras Law College. He began practising law in the Madras High Court from 1911. Within a short span of time, he became one of the prominent lawyers in Madras. 
His eloquence and popularity as a lawyer provided him with several political opportunities. In 1917 he joined the Justice Party and rose to be one of its notable members. As a member of the Madras Legislative Council, he took a deep interest in reforming education and was instrumental in the passing of key educational laws including Madras Education Act, 1920 and  Madras University Act, 1923.
Several international delegations including  Joint Parliamentary Committee on Constitutional Reforms for India,  British Commonwealth Relations Conference and Indian Delegation to the Pacific Relations Conference benefitted from Mudaliar’s active involvement. 
In 1946, he became the Chief Minister of Mysore State.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Mudaliar led the Justice Party delegation in the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Constitutional Reforms in India. He took an active part in the Round Table Conferences. 
Watch: Mudaliar’s address on the food crisis in India.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Mudaliar represented Mysore state in the Constituent Assembly. He strongly advocated for a strict federal structure and intervened in a debate pertaining to fiscal federalism. 
Later Contributions
Post-independence, Mudaliar had a prolific career in international relations. He headed numerous Indian delegations to the UN. In 1946 he was elected the first President of the United Nations’ Economic and Social Council. He also went on to serve as the chair of the executive boards of the WHO and UNESCO. Mudaliar was a well-respected delegate at the ILO, where he was a member of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations (1959-1971). During this time, he was elected Chair of the Committee for seven years, from 1962 to 1969.
In 1958, AMM Charities Trust set up Sir Ramaswamy Mudaliar Higher Secondary School in Ambattur, Tamil Nadu.
The government awarded Mudaliar with the Padma Bhushan in the year 1954 and the Padma Vibhusan in 1970.


 



Key Speeches



In a debate on the centre-state distribution of taxation powers, Mudaliar argued for the centre to be vested with greater taxation powers in order to enable it to fulfil its nation-building mandate and provide for national defence.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















