






























Indian Constitution Framers Refused to Regulate Religious Attire - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										Indian Constitution Framers Refused to Regulate Religious Attire


 

















 





Video




 




Indian Constitution Framers Refused to Regulate Religious Attire

September 12, 2022






The Supreme Court of India is hearing a challenge to the constitutional validity of Karantaka’s ban on the wearing of Hijab in educational institutions. Muslim students argue that the ban violates their right to religious freedom guaranteed in the Constitution.
On Day 2 of the hearings, Senior Advocate Devadatt Kamat, representing the students, referred to the Constituent Assembly Debates on Article 25 and argued that the Constitution Framers rejected a proposal to restrict the wearing religious attire in public.
Here, Tanya Kini revisits this debate. Was there such a proposal? Who proposed it, and why?
Transcript
Currently, the Supreme Court of India is hearing a challenge to a Karnataka Government Order that banned the wearing of Hijabs in educational institutions. Muslim students argued that the ban violated their Fundamental Right to freedom of conscience and practice of religion guaranteed under Article 25 of the Constitution.
On day 2 of the hearing, Senior Advocate Devadutt Kamat, representing the students, brought the Court’s attention to a discussion in the Indian Constituent Assembly on the topic of religious attire in public spaces. But what exactly is this debate that Sr. Advocate Kamat is referring to?
We go back 74 years when the Constituent Assembly had taken up Draft Article 19, which is Article 25 of our present Constitution, for debate.
The Draft Article stated that: ‘all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion’. It also contained an explanation that allowed people of the Sikh religion to carry kirpans in public spaces.
Tajamul Hussain, a barrister and political leader from Bihar, wanted to replace this explanation with ‘no person shall have any visible sign or mark or name, and no person shall wear any dress whereby his religion may be recognised’.
He believed that religion was a private matter between an individual and God and not something that had to be publicly expressed. For example, he observed that in Europe and the United States, one could not identify a person’s religion from their name or clothes.
Hussain continued that in India, ‘You find dhoties, pyjamas, kurtas and all sorts of things…’. However, in the interest of secularism and national integration, he reasoned that Indians should be uniform in their dress code and name, bearing no visible signs of religion.
Another member, Maulana Hasrat Mohani stood up and jokingly remarked that maybe Hussain should perhaps begin by changing his own name as it clearly signalled his religion.
No one else really responded to Hussain’s proposal. In fact, most members likely found the amendment rather bizarre considering India’s diversity and the predicament of religious minorities at that time.
Sure enough, at the end of the debate, the Constituent Assembly rejected Tajamul Hussain’s proposal to restrict religious attire in public spaces.

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















