






























Desk Brief: Extending Affirmative Action to the Supreme Court? - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Extending Affirmative Action to the Supreme Court?


 
















Desk Brief: Extending Affirmative Action to the Supreme Court?



Blog



Editorial Team






20 September 2021

Share









 
									Image Credit: Wikimedia Commons								

The Constitution of India 1950 frames a comprehensive architecture for affirmative action in India. A key element of this is the representation of members from marginalised communities in different organs of the State including the legislature, executive bodies and public services.
The Constituent Assembly, in its plenary debates and Committees extensively debated the need for ensuring representation of marginalised communities. Historical Constitutions (HCs) like the Sapru Committee Report (1945) and States and Minorities (1945) argued for aggressive representation of under-represented groups like the Dalit community in the legislature, executive and public services.
Strikingly, neither the Constituent Assembly nor the HCs ever considered affirmative action measures for the Supreme Court. No proposal, no speech, no constitutional document, it appears, even gestured towards the idea that the Supreme Court bench must be representative, reflect India’s social groups, or comprise historically under-represented communities. We cannot discern any reasons for this. However, we could speculate.
It might be the case that the intellectual discourse during the middle of the 20th century on questions of representation and diversity was limited to the legislature, executive and public services – which for the time was novel and radical. Maybe the judiciary was seen as an ‘expert’ institution and the appointment of judges had to be done purely on merit and ability, and there was no room for compromise on these criteria. This echoes the Law Commission which on several occasions has recommended that appointments should be solely based on merit and seniority and communal, political and regional considerations should be rejected.
And so, in 1950, when India got a Supreme Court, appointments were primarily based on merit and seniority. Predictably, the Court has more or less become an upper-caste male-dominated space. But in recent years, it appears that the Supreme Court has shown some self-awareness on the profile of its judges. In 2019, when the Collegium recommended Justice Gavai to be appointed to the Supreme Court, it stated, that it ‘kept in mind the desirability of giving due representation on the Bench of the Supreme Court, as far as possible, to all High Courts as wells as to all sections of the society including those belonging to SC/ST/OBC categories, women and minorities’.
In 2021, the President appointed 3 woman judges and many began to wonder if this was an attempt to improve the representation of marginalised groups in the Supreme Court. The judges of the Supreme Court are appointed under Article 124(2) of the Constitution based on the recommendations of a ‘Collegium‘ of Supreme Court judges. The processes and criteria that the Collegium adopts in appointing judges are not made public. In light of this, even if Collegium is attempting to improve the representative credentials of the Court, should we rely on the whims of this body?
Countries that have chosen to make their Supreme Courts representative, have encoded these into their laws and Constitutions: Section 64 of the Constitutional Reforms Act, 2005 of the United Kingdom, specifies the need for ‘Encouragement of diversity’. It states that subject to conditions of merit and good character, ‘The Commission, in performing its functions under this Part, must have regard to the need to encourage diversity in the range of persons available for selection for appointments.‘ The South African Constitution also requires that appointments of judges should reflect the racial and gender composition of the country.
Is it time that we now have laws that ensure that the Supreme Court is more inclusive and comprise all marginalised communities – not just gender diversity? There are challenges though to this approach. There already exists simmering tensions between the executive and judiciary in the appointment process. Legislative intervention could exacerbate these tensions and would be viewed as an assault on judicial independence and autonomy of the Supreme Court.

Tags Historical ConstitutionIndian Constituent AssemblySupreme Court of IndiaAffirmative action 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















