






























Satyanarayan Sinha - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Satyanarayan Sinha


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Satyanarayan Sinha
1900 - 1983




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Provincial Constitution Committee 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Satyanarayan Sinha was born in July 1900 to a zamindari family in Bihar. He did his schooling at Muzaffarpur Zila School and later went on to receive a law degree from the Patna University.
Sinha grew up to be an agriculturalist and zamindar who later joined Bihar politics. He became a member of Bihar Legislative Council in 1926 and Member of Central Legislative Assembly in 1934. He was elected as the Congress Party’s Whip in the Central Assembly.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Sinha was involved in India’s freedom struggle since the 1920s. He became a member of the Indian National Congress Party in 1924 and rose to various leadership positions within.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Sinha was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bihar from a Congress party ticket. He was the Chief Whip of the Congress Assembly Party. Unlike the current parliamentary form of a three-line whip, the Assembly’s whip was a ‘mimeographed lists of provisions and amendments that were to be accepted or rejected’.
Later Contributions
Sinha was elected to the first three Lok Sabhas. He continued to serve as the Congress Party’s Chief Whip. During his tenure at the Lok Sabha, he held several portfolios including Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and Information and Broadcasting (1963 to 1964) and Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and Communications (1964 to 1967).
He was appointed as the Governor of Madhya Pradesh between 1971 and 1977.


 



Key Speeches


Sinha moved a series of resolutions to appoint several Committees in the Assembly.


 



Resources


Former Governors of Madhya Pradesh (Raj Bhavan, Madhya Pradesh)


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















