






























SRCC, NLU Delhi Win Northern Regional Round of ConQuest 2022, Qualify For Finals in Bengaluru - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										SRCC, NLU Delhi Win Northern Regional Round of ConQuest 2022, Qualify For Finals in Bengaluru


 



Quiz
SRCC, NLU Delhi Win Northern Regional Round of ConQuest 2022, Qualify For Finals in Bengaluru
The Print team









										19 Nov																			

2022


Quiz



 Venue
National Law University Delhi


Share









Shri Ram College of Commerce (SRCC) and National Law University (NLU) won the final round of the ConQuest2022 quiz competition in the north zone at NLU, Delhi, organised by the Centre for Law and Policy Research (CLPR).
Over 180 students in 62 teams from various disciplines representing colleges such as Jawaharlal Nehru University, Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi University’s colleges Hindu, Lady Shri Ram, Kirori Mal, Hansraj, and Faridabad’s Pt Jawahar Lal Nehru Government College, Noida’s Amity University, and Jalandhar’s Lovely Professional University contested in the preliminary round.
Six teams battled for the top two positions to proceed to the finals. These included two teams from NLU, two from DU’s Campus Law Center, one team from SRCC and one team from JNU. The competition finals will be held in Bengaluru on 3 December 2022.
Finalists of the North Regional Round with the CLPR team
President Murmu, Punjab CM, Iran protest in prelims
The preliminary rounds had 20 questions from Indian history, the Independence struggle, politics, the Indian Consitution, and current affairs.
One question featured a stand-up video from the show “Comedy Ka King Kaun”. Then, the participants were asked to guess the performer’s name. After the preliminary round, when the answers were revealed, an overwhelming majority of the audience shouted Punjab Chief Minister Bhagwant Mann’s name, which was the correct answer.
Curious and intelligent college students enthusiastically showcased their knowledge in questions about Jaypraksh Narayan’s weekly ‘Everyman’, camouflage ‘fake’ passport, the length of the Constitutions, the viral song ‘Baraye’ on Iranian protest, the abolition of slavery, the architecture of the high courts, Centre-State disputes, the Constituent Assembly, Pre-Independence history, modern history, trivia on President Droupadi Murmu and the Bengal famine.
The question about President Murmu was: This ethnic group’s name is said to be derived from the local word for ‘calmness’. They are the third largest scheduled tribe community in the country after Gond and Bhil. This group was in the news earlier in the year, thanks to an appointment. Identify the group. The correct answer is the Santhal tribe to which President Murmu belongs. She is the first woman tribal President of India.
A video question about Iranian protest was also asked: Shervin Hajipur’s song, “Baraye”, meaning “for”, was written by adding music to a string of tweets by people speaking out against their country’s government regarding recent events. What recent issue led to the creation of this song? Many students answered this question correctly.
In this round, the law students from DU’s CLC said that the questions based on the Constitution were easy for them because of their background. In contrast, the KMC students found the level a bit difficult. On the other hand, computer science students from LPU, Jalandhar, found these questions “informative” and said they should have been more “lenient” since they belonged to a different discipline.
A topsy-turvy final contest
In the final contest, six teams battled for the top two positions. At this stage, there were five rounds, with the first one having six questions on topics ranging from Sidhu Moosewala’s song on SYL (Satluj Yamuna Link) issue related to water rights of Punjab, Dalit women-run digital news organisation ‘Khabar Lahariya’, the beating retreat ceremony, and Basic Structure Doctrine among others.
Quizmaster Raghav Chakravarthy conducting the Final round
In the ‘List it’ round, the teams were supposed to list as many correct answers as they could from 9 options. From this list, 6 were correct, proving to be a booster as several could gather points strategically. After this round, the second NLU team was leading with 80 points, JNU and SRCC were in a tie with 75 points each, and the first NLU team stood third with 60 points.
However, during the last two buzzer rounds, JNU’s team saw a dramatic loss of scores because of negative markings. The final scoreboard saw SRCC leading (85 points), NLU teams 1 and 2 (70 points each) in a tie for the runner-up position, and JNU standing third with 55 points.
The tie-breaker question was as follows: Silent protest by school children in New Delhi in November 1973 carried a slogan which famously read ‘Eat Custard, Spare the ___’. Fill in the blank.
NLU Delhi team 1 answered the ‘Great Indian Bustard’ promptly and qualified for the finals at Bengaluru along with SRCC.
Both the teams told ThePrint they had strategised among themselves, dividing the subject areas each member had a good hold on, to contest in the competition.


This article first appeared in ThePrint on 20 November 2022.
ConQuest 2022 is organised by the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bengaluru and is supported by the South Regional office of the Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung für die Freiheit.
ThePrint is a digital partner.








More in events





 Quiz



Gauhati Medical College Wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2022
 Christ (Deemed to be) University, Bengaluru



Event Report


03 Dec
2022







 Quiz



National Law School of India University Wins South Zone Prelims, Reaches ConQuest 2022 Finals
 St. Joseph's College of Law



Event Report


26 Nov
2022


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















