






























Kamalapati Tripathi - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Kamalapati Tripathi


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Kamalapati Tripathi
1905 - 1990




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Doctorate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Kamalapati Tripathi was born on 3rd September 1905. He obtained a D.Litt from Kashi Vidyapeeth in Varanasi. He started his career as a journalist with the Hindi newspaper Aaj. He was a senior Indian National Congress leader in the Varanasi constituency. He was also the chairman of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan from1947 to 1948.
Role in India’s Independence movement
Tripathi participated in the Non-Cooperation Movement in the United Province in 1920, the Civil Disobedience Movement in the United Province in 1930 and the Quit India Movement in 1942, for which he was arrested and imprisoned on several occasions.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Kamalapati Tripathi was elected to the Constituent Assembly from United Province on Congress Party ticket and played an important part in the drafting of the Constitution of India.
He is quite famous for his speech on the amendment of the expression “India, that is, Bharat”. In his words, it would have been more in accordance with the prestige and the traditions of the country, and the Constituent Assembly if this amendment was made.
Later Contributions
Kamalapati Tripathi served as the Minister of Information and Irrigation in the year 1952. He served as the Minister of Home, Education and Information Department in the year 1957. He served as the Finance Minister in the year 1962. He became the Deputy Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh in 1969. He briefly served as the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh in the year 1971. He was a member of Rajya Sabha from 1973 to 1980 and the member of Lok Sabha from 1980 to 1984. He served as Union Minister for Railways for two times first from 1975 to 1977 and then briefly in 1980.
He presented the Railway Budget of India four times: 1975–76, 1976–77, 1980–81 (interim) and 1980–81 (final).
He died on 8th October 1990 in Varanasi.
Key Writings
Kamalapati’s notable works reflect his sustained love for Gandhi, including Bapu aur Bharat, Bapu aur Manawata (Hindi and English) and “Freedom Movements and Afterward.”


 



Key Speeches



On 18 September 1949, he advocated the nomenclature of country as “Bharat, that is, India” as opposed to “India, that is, Bharat.” He believed that it would have been more in accordance with the prestige and the traditions of the country if this amendment was adopted, since it gave primacy to the Hindustani language over English.
Tripathi criticised the Constitution for being overly centralised and not taking into account India’s indigenous village democracies.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















