






























Does Affirmative Action Conflict with Efficiency? - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Does Affirmative Action Conflict with Efficiency?


 
















Does Affirmative Action Conflict with Efficiency?



Blog



Editorial Team






14 October 2021

Share









 
Article 335 of the Constitution states that government will consider the representation of SC/ST communities as a factor when they make appointments to posts or services, subject to the condition that the efficiency of administration will be maintained.
The Supreme Court of India is currently hearing a case in which questions concerning Article 335 are at stake including: What does it mean to maintain efficiency in administration? How can this be guaranteed?
During oral arguments, Senior Advocate Indira Jaising said that Article 335 placed efficiency and SC/ST representation on an equal footing. The Article did not give primacy to efficiency. Senior Advocate Rajeev Dhavan however stated that Article 335’s mandate of maintaining efficiency required that appointments be based on seniority and merit and suggested that this had to be given primacy over reservations for SC/STs.
In this, Dhavan appeared to echo Brajeshwar Prasad’s speech in the Assembly on Article 335 (Draft Article 296):
‘…that there shall be only one consideration before the Public Service Commission, namely, the efficiency of administration and the merit of the individual candidate. The Public Service Commission shall not take into consideration the claims of the minority communities. The Public Service Commission shall not be swayed by any other consideration at the time of making appointments…’
Prasad moved an amendment to the Draft Article to prioritize efficiency over SC/ST representation in making appointments.
The Constituent Assembly rejected his amendment which suggests that the Assembly made a conscious decision not to give primacy to considerations of efficiency. It appears that the Assembly did not see any conflict between the two.
But after the Constitution was enacted, cases emerged around appointments where issues were framed to suggest a conflict between efficiency and SC/ST representation. In some instances, courts have pushed back against this. In KC Vasanth Kumar (1985), Justice Chinnappa Reddy noted that this framing was based on the assumption that “those belonging of upper castes and classes, who are appointed to non-reserved posts… naturally perform better than those who have been appointed to reserved posts”. A similar observation was made by the Supreme Court in B K Pavitra (2019).

Tags Supreme Court of IndiaAffirmative action 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















