






























V. T. Krishnamachari - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										V. T. Krishnamachari


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
V. T. Krishnamachari
1881 - 1964




Key Information

Party: 
Constituency: Rajputana
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Tamil
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
V.T. Krishnamachari was born on 8 February 1881 in Vangal, Tamil Nadu. He completed his education and received a BA BL degree.
After completing his education he joined the Indian Civil Services and was a prominent civil servant. He was the Diwan of the State of Baroda (1927-1944) and a member of the Reserve Bank Committee in British India (1930-1934).
Krishnamachari served as the Chairman of the Committee of Ministers, Chamber of Princes (1941-1944) and the Prime Minister of the State of Jaipur (1946-1949). He was also the Indian delegate to the Assembly of League of Nations and the advisor to the Indian delegation to the Imperial Conference.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Although, he played many important roles in the public affairs of the country, not much is known about his role India’s Independence Movement.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Krishnamachari was a representative of the princely State of Jaipur in the Assembly. He suggested a few major amendments while he was a part of the Assembly. His interventions were mostly related to the powers of the Centre and the Provinces.
Later Contributions
Krishnamachari was known as an excellent administrator and the man behind the Panchayati Raj system. He served as the Chairman of the Indian States Finances Enquiry Committee (1948-1949) and the Indian Fiscal Commission (1949).
His main contribution as an administrator was when he served as the Deputy/Vice Chairman of the Planning Commission (1953-60). He supported and worked towards better agricultural production and irrigation. Under his guidance the Planning Commission launched the Community Development program and he strongly believed that villages were central to India’s identity and democratic system.
Krishnamachari was the first chairman of the Indian Institute of Public Administration (1954-1963). He passed away on 14 February 1964.
Key Writings
Krishnamachari was an author to multiple books, some of which include – Fundamentals of Planning in India, Community Development in India and Planned Development and Efficient Administration.
 


 



Key Speeches



Krishnamachari believed that the only on the consent of the provinces should international agreements entered into by India be implemented, if they were on matters under the State List.
He moved an amendment to remove the Centre’s power to recuisition land from the ambit of ‘Defence power’. He felt that the power to arbitrarily requisition land cannot exist during the times of peace and ordinary Land acquisition procedure must be followed.



 



Resources



Sri V. T. Krishnamachari: A Life of Enduring Service by Tarlok Singh (Indian Journal of Public Administration, 1964)
VT Krishnamachari: India’s master planner who laid the foundation of panchayati raj system by Achyut Mishra (The Print, 2018)
Portrait of Sir V T Krishnamachari, Dewan of Baroda by Elizabeth Brunner (National Gallery of Modern Art, 1938)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















