






























How India Became the First Republic in the Commonwealth - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Podcasts
								 ≫ 
												The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast
								 ≫ 
										How India Became the First Republic in the Commonwealth


 




 






EP 01

Indian Constitution Framers Refused to Regulate Religious Attire




EP 03


Chileans Overwhelmingly Reject a New, Progressive Constitution






Podcast








Episode 2
How India Became the First Republic in the Commonwealth

17 February 2023
The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast




In this podcast, we revisit how Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru convinced the Constituent Assembly to ratify the Indian government’s decision to remain in the Commonwealth whilst being a republic.
Transcript
On 8 September 2022, Queen Elizabeth II, the longest-serving monarch of the United Kingdom passed away. This has reignited debates around the role of British monarchy in the contemporary world. It appears some Commonwealth countries are thinking about cutting ties with the British crown.
India did this in 1950 when it declared itself as a Republic. However, it still remained part of the Commonwealth. This was odd. To be a Commonwealth member was to accept the British monarch as the head of State. A Republic meant you rejected the monarchy.
How did we end up being a republic and a member of the Commonwealth? At the Commonwealth Prime Ministers’ Conference in 1949, Nehru was able to convince the conference and the British government to let India continue as a Commonwealth member while being a republic. But this decision had to be ratified by the Constituent Assembly.
On 16 May 1949, Nehru proposed that the Assembly ratify the Indian government’s decision to remain in the Commonwealth. This came as a surprise to many members. It was Nehru himself who in his 1946 Objectives Resolution speech had declared that India would be a Sovereign republic which in effect meant that India’s head of state can never be a monarch, domestic or foreign.
But since 1946, Nehru’s attitude towards the Commonwealth was evolving. He began to believe that Commonwealth membership would bring political and economic benefits to India.
But many Assembly members were unconvinced. For instance, Shibban Lal Saxena suggested that a Commonwealth membership was akin to dominion status—something the Congress had consistently opposed. HV Kamath grasped the novelty of this political arrangement, but saw no benefit in it.
Frank Anthony supported Nehru. He argued that India’s economic and military interests were served by having a cordial relationship with Britain. Begum Aizaz Rasul added that the criticism of Nehru was based on suspicion, mistrust and a certain sense of fear towards the British.
Picture of a Nehru Quote – ‘the world has changed; England has changed; Europe has changed; India has changed; everything has changed and is changing….’
In the end, Nehru responded to the critics. He suggested that the opposition to India’s membership arose out of a place of bitterness towards the British and India’s experience of British colonialism. He argued that things were different now. In the end, the Constituent Assembly ratified India’s decision to remain in the Commonwealth of Nations.














We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















