






























Sub-Committee II (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee) - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 







Home
								 ≫ 
												Committees
								 ≫ 
										Sub-Committee II (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee)


 






Constitution Making 
Committees

Sub-Committee II (Appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee)




















This sub-committee was appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee to discuss the question of second chambers in the legislatures of provinces.


 





Members




 



 



 



 





										B.G. Kher, 										
										P. Subbarayan, 										
										Kailash Nath Katju, 										
										B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya 



Meeting DatesJune 10, 1947 


 




Background


Bicameral legislatures have been present in India since the Government of India Act 1919. In his study on constitutional precedents, Constitutional Adviser B.N. Rau noted the advantages and disadvantages of second chambers, which informed the debate in the Constituent Assembly and its committees.
Although the Union Constitution Committee strongly advocated for a second chamber, the Provincial Constitution Committee was uncertain. In fact, out of the six members who responded to B.N. Rau’s questionnaire, five were in favor of single chambers, with only K.N. Katju supporting second chambers. However, the Committee decided to leave this issue to the individual provinces themselves and appointed a sub-committee on 9 June 1947, to investigate the composition and other specifics should a province decide to have one.




Work Summary








Sub-Committee II, appointed by the Provincial Constitution Committee, convened on 10 June 1947 to deliberate and present their findings on the composition of second chambers in provincial legislatures, if deemed necessary. The committee concluded that the upper house should not exceed 25% of the lower house’s numerical strength.
The Committee endorsed the concept of functional representation in the upper house, based on the Irish model, wherein half the seats would be elected by functional interest groups, while the remaining seats would be elected by the lower house via proportional representation or nominated by the Governor.
During the Constituent Assembly Debates, most members opposed the establishment of second chambers in the provinces, as they believed it would cause unnecessary delays in passing legislation. Additionally, they felt that the upper house did not serve any federal function at the provincial level, as it did at the Union level. Thus, the decision to establish a second chamber was left to individual provinces, and this provision has been incorporated into the Indian Constitution.













Resources



The Framing of India’s Constitution 1966, Vol. 2 by Shiva Rao
The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation by Granville Austin




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















