






























Article 134: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part V

Article
134



Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters

(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court—
(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(c) certifies under article 134A that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court:
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to such provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to such conditions as the High Court may establish or require.
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territoryof India subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law.



 
 

Version 1




Article 134, Constitution of India 1950
(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court—
(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(c) certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court:
⁠Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to such provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to such conditions as the High Court may establish or require.
⁠(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law.




Summary


Draft Article 111A (Article 134) was not included in the Draft Constitution of India 1948. A member moved the following amendment:
‘That after clause (2) of article 111, the following new clause be inserted:-
(3) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court against the judgments of the High Courts in the territory of India in the exercise of its criminal jurisdiction in the following cases:-
(a) convicting accused persons as a result of acceptance of appeals against their acquittal.
(b) sentencing to or confirming the sentence of death or transportation for life.
(c) in respect of other matter when the High Court grants a certificate that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.’
This amendment was debated as Draft Article 111A on 13 and 14 June 1949. It conferred the power to hear criminal appeals on the Supreme Court.
A number of amendments were proposed to the Draft Article, which ranged from providing appeals only where the sentence of imprisonment exceeded five years to only permitting appeals after the High Court certified that the case was fit for appeal.
One member argued that appeal should exist in three cases: when certified by the High Court, when a High Court sentences a person to death, and where Parliament provides for appeal by law. Most members agreed with the requirement of High Court certification, with one member stating that Draft Article 112 (Article 136) ‘committed us to the acceptance of the principle that appeals must lie also on a certificate by the High Court concerned in criminal cases’. Other members disagreed with the latter provision, arguing that it left the judiciary vulnerable to parliamentary interference.
Another member proposed that appeals should also lie where an acquittal by a Sessions Court has been overturned by a High Court, and in any case involving ‘an important question of law’. Some members supported this proposition; they referred to the situations in which social discrimination had resulted in a guilty verdict, and argued that if appeals were not permitted in that situation, innocent men would be hanged.
After hearing these arguments, the Chairman of the Drafting Committee proposed an amendment to wholly replace the Draft Article as follows:
‘111-A. The Supreme Court shall have power to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court with regard to criminal matters order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India-
(a) if the High Court has on appeal reversed the order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(b) if the High Court has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(c) if the High Court certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court :
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) of this clause shall lie subject to such rules as may from time to time be made by the Supreme Court and to such conditions as the High Court may establish or require.
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law.’
One member argued that this amendment went ‘against the very grain’ of the Objectives Resolution and the fundamental rights since it did not provide a right to appeal for convicted persons not sentenced to death. He was particularly against the proviso to clause (c) since it imposed more restrictions on criminal appeals than civil.
A member of the Drafting Committee questioned the necessity of the Draft Article, since it appeared that the Supreme Court already had the power to hear a criminal appeal under Draft Article 112 (Article 136). Another member responded that Draft Article 112 gave the Supreme Court a discretionary power to hear an appeal, whereas the present Draft Article gave convicted persons the right to have their appeal heard by the court in certain circumstances.
The Chairman of the Drafting Committee stated that the amendment took into account the main concerns expressed by the majority of the Assembly since it provided a right to appeal to persons sentenced to death, while requiring the certification of the High Court in other cases to ensure that the Supreme Court was not overburdened with cases. Moreover, if a lacunae in the law was identified in the future, Parliament had the freedom to expand the right to criminal appeals through legislation.
All the proposed amendments were withdrawn or negatived, with the exception of the amendment proposed by the Chairman of the Drafting Committee. The amended Draft Article was adopted on 14 June 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















