






























N.G. Ranga Rao - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										N.G. Ranga Rao


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
N.G. Ranga Rao
1900 - 1995




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Telugu
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life:
Nayakulu G. Ranga was born on 7 November 1900 in Guntur District in present-day Andhra Pradesh. He went to England in 1920 for higher education, and graduated with a B.Litt in Economics from the University of Oxford. While at Oxford, he became inspired by Marxist ideology.
Ranga returned to India and began his teaching career in 1927 as a professor of economics at Pachayappa College, Madras. He served as the economic advisor to the Madras Government from 1929-30.
In 1930, he quit his teaching career to devote his time to politics. Ranga joined the All India Congress Committee in that year, and won election to the Central Legislative Assembly. He was also active in social work, and was an active participant in the movement to abolish the zamindari system in the Andhra region. In 1935, Ranga founded the All India Kisan Congress in support of farmers rights, and was later elected as its President. Later in 1947, he served as President of the Andhra Congress Committee.
An avid writer who was also interested in journalism, Ranga served as a reporter for the newspaper Bombay Chronicle and Andhra Patrika.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Ranga was a follower of Mahatma Gandhi, and the latter was impressed by his political acumen and knowledge of economics. Gandhi tasked him with persuading political leaders to adopt universal adult franchise.
As a member of the Central Legislative Assembly, Ranga publicly opposed the Simon Commission Report and the First Round Table Conference, which occurred without Gandhi’s inputs. He continuously advocated for complete independence, rather than negotiations for limited self-governance.
In 1940, Ranga was arrested for his support of Subhash Chandra Bose’s revolutionary Forward Bloc.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Ranga was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras on a Congress party ticket. He made several interventions in the Assembly on debates such as on decentralization of power, emergency powers, bicameralism, and creation of an Andhra Province.
Later Contributions:
Ranga left the Congress party in 1951 primarily due to his differences with Nehru on land reforms. He went on to found the Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party with J.B. Kripalani and Tanguturi Prakasam, although he soon left due to differences with Prakasam. He then founded the Krishikar Lok Party, which merged the Praja Party and the Congress party to form the United Congress, which came to power in Madras Presidency.
In 1957, Ranga was elected to the Lok Sabha. He went on serve six times on tickets of various parties.
Ranga opposed Nehru’s proposal for cooperative farming, and organised a conference for the Krishna District Kisan Sabha in 1957 to organize farmers against this proposal. These differences led him to leave the United Congress alliance and co-found the Swatantra Party in 1959. As a member of the Swatantra Party, Ranga gave a historic speech opposing the 17th Amendment.
Ranga eventually returned to the Congress in 1972 after the Swatantra Party was defeated in the 1971 elections.
He passed away on 9th June 1995. For his lifelong support of farmers, Ranga is celebrated as the Father of the Indian Kisan Movement.
Key Writings:
Ranga was an avid writer and academic. Some of his notable works include Fight for Freedom, The Peasants and Cooperative Farming, The Economics of Handloom, and two volumes of Economic Organization of Indian Villages. He also wrote prolifically about the oppressed classes in Telugu.


 



Key Speeches



Ranga spoke in favour of decentralization of powers to the panchayats to enhance the decision-making ability of farmers and peasants. He was against the accumulation of power by the Centre as it was antithetical to Gandhian Principles.
He concurred with the suspension of fundamental rights during emergency for the greater good of the nation.
Ranga expressed his disapproval towards bicameral legislature in provinces.
He advocated for the creation of a separate Andhra Province to the Assembly for a better administration of the region.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















