






























C. M. Poonacha - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										C. M. Poonacha


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
C. M. Poonacha
1910 - 1983




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Coorg
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Kannada
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Provincial Constitution CommitteeThe Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Cheppudira Muthanna Poonacha was born on 16 September 1910 in South Coorg’s Athoor village located in present day Karnataka. He completed his schooling from Madikeri and Virajpet in Coorg. He began his undergraduate studies at St. Aloysius College, Mangalore but left mid-way to join the Indian freedom movement.  
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Poonacha’s involvement in the freedom struggle landed him in jail on multiple occasions. During the Salt Satyagraha movement he went to prison twice – in 1932 and 1933. For his decision to take part in the Gandhi-led Individual Satyagraha movement, he was detained for a year from 1940 to 1941. The Quit India movement that began the following year saw him return to jail, where he remained detained until 1944 
A year later, Poonacha was elected to the Coorg Legislative Council and remained a member until 1951. Throughout his term, he was also the leader of the Congress in the Council. 
Poonacha occupied important party positions within the Congress. His first official post within the Party was that of the Secretary of the Coorg District Congress Committee, which he served from 1934 to 1938. The year he completed his term as the Secretary, Poonacha simultaneously became the member of both the Executive Committee of the Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee and the All-India Congress Committee. Again in 1938, he was elected to the Coorg District Board and soon turned Board President in 1941. 
Contribution to Constitution Making
Poonacha was Coorg’s sole representative in the Constituent Assembly. He was elected on a Congress Party ticket. He did not actively participate in the Assembly proceedings. 
Later Contributions
After independence, a new Coorg Legislative Assembly was created. The first and last election to this Assembly was held in 1952. Poonacha was elected to the Assembly on the back of a campaign that supported Coorg’s merger with Mysore State. Poonacha’s Congress won a majority, and he became Coorg’s first, and last, Chief Minister.  
In 1956, Coorg merged with the State of Mysore. The following year, Poonacha stood for the elections to the Mysore Legislative Assembly, and won from the Madikeri constituency. He became a part of the new State cabinet and was appointed the Minister for Industries and Commerce in 1956. Later, he took up the Home and Industries portfolio. He also held the post of Chairman of the State Trading Corporation of India between 1959-63.  
In 1964, he became a Rajya Sabha member. In the years that followed he held a number of posts in the Union Executive that included Minister of State for Finance (1966), the Minister of State for Transport, Aviation, Shipping and Tourism (1966-1967), the Union Minister of Railways (1967-69) and the Union Minister for Steel and Heavy Engineering (1969-71).
Towards the end of his career,  Poonacha was appointed as the Governor of Madhya Pradesh (1978-80) and Orissa (1982-83). 
Poonacha passed away on 17 August 1983.


 



Key Speeches



Poonacha intervened in the Assembly to establish a sub-committee to look into the future of administration in the Chief Commissioner’s Provinces (later re-named Union Territories) in a newly independent India.



 



Resources



Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India) 
Members Bioprofile (Loksabha.nic.in) 
Bio-Data Of Governors Of Orissa (Orissa Annual Reference, 2005) 



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















