






























Mumbai’s Government Law College wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2020 - Constitution of India































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Events
								 ≫ 
										Mumbai’s Government Law College wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2020


 



Quiz
Mumbai’s Government Law College wins Grand Finale of ConQuest 2020
The Print team









										25 Oct																			

2020


Quiz



 Venue
Virtual


Share









On Sunday, the fifth edition of ConQuest, India’s premier national quiz on the country’s history, constitutional law and politics, had its grand finale, and the Government Law College, Mumbai was declared the winner.
The quiz is an initiative by the Centre for Law & Policy Research (CLPR) and its fifth edition took place online due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The main aim of the quiz is to bring the Constitution closer to younger people.
The preliminary rounds of the quiz had more than 600 students from colleges across India participating across various disciplines, after which were four knockout rounds. And finally, eight teams made it to the grand finale: West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata, St. Stephens College, Ramjas College and Hindu College from Delhi University, Symbiosis Law School, Pune, National Law School of India University, Bangalore, National Institute of Technology Jamshedpur and Government Law College, Mumbai.
The winning team received a prize of Rs 30,000, the first runners-up got Rs 20,000, while those in third place were awarded Rs 15,000 (per team).
Questions ranged from US Supreme Court to books on Emergency
The finale consisted of three rounds, in between which were sprinkled a few audience questions. In the first round, which was the direct question round, there was no negative marking and although each question was directed at one particular team, all teams could respond in the 30 second window. The questions covered political history, previous legislations and facts about the Constituent Assembly, among other topics.
At the end of the first round, Kolkata’s NUJS was in the lead, followed by St. Stephens College and Hindu College.
The second round featured multiple-choice questions, where out of the nine options for answer, six were correct. Participants were given 60 seconds and no passing was allowed in this round.
The questions were rapid and ranged from naming former Speakers of the Lok Sabha and listing books written on the Emergency to identifying decisions taken by former US Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg and more.
At the end of the second round, St. Stephens College, NIT Jamshedpur and GLC, Mumbai, were tied in first place with 7,000 points, with Ramjas College at a close second with 6,000 points.
Last round was called Kahoot, in which each team was given 10 questions and had to fill in the blanks. And at the end of the round, the ultimate winner of ConQuest 2020 was Government Law College, Mumbai. In second place was NIT Jamshedpur, while Delhi’s St. Stephens College came third.
Need for young lawyers
The Guest of Honour was Arvind Datar, a senior advocate of the Supreme Court of India, who congratulated all participants and the winners and said it was an interesting contest.
He urged the students to practice law and not stick to corporate jobs and said, “We require good young lawyers in the years to come.” And told everyone that irrespective of whichever subject they decided to pursue, they should continue honing their interest in Constitutional law.


This article first appeared in ThePrint








More in events





 Quiz



Four More Teams Qualify, Stage is Set for ConQuest Grand Finale on 25 October
 Virtual



Event Report


17 Oct
2020







 Quiz



Knockout Rounds of Fifth Edition of ConQuest Begin, Four Teams Qualify for Grand Finale
 Virtual



Event Report


10 Oct
2020


















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















