






























This Month in Constitution-Making (November 1946): Was The Constituent Assembly Valid Despite Muslim League Absence? - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										This Month in Constitution-Making (November 1946): Was The Constituent Assembly Valid Despite Muslim League Absence?


 
















This Month in Constitution-Making (November 1946): Was The Constituent Assembly Valid Despite Muslim League Absence?



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






08 November 2021

Share









 
									Mountbatten in a meeting with Nehru, Jinnah and others to plan Partition.
Image credit: Wikimedia Commons								

In November 1946, key Indian political and legal figures were knee-deep in preparations for setting up the Constituent Assembly of India. The Muslim League was against the convening of the Assembly and signaled that it would not participate in the proceedings. On 22nd November, it officially announced a boycott. The Indian National Congress, which had been pushing for an Assembly for a long time, moved forward despite the League backing out.
B.N Rau, the Assembly’s Constitutional Advisor was entrusted to anchor the convening of the Assembly. Unlike the Congress leadership and others, Rau was concerned about the League’s boycott, particularly, the implications of the League’s absence on the legal validity of the Assembly.
Rau, in a note, alerted Jawaharlal Nehru to the legal possibilities that might arise. He referred to the Cabinet Mission Plan – the document responsible for the creation of the Assembly – and English law to suggest that the absence of the League could render the Assembly legally invalid. He felt that the League could take the matter up at the Federal Court and stall the constitution-making process.
Rau’s note did not seem to have any effect on the Congress leadership as preparations continued. That said, it appears that some members took cognizance of the note. On 8 December 1946, a day before the Assembly sat for the first time, K.M. Munshi, a senior Congress leader, wrote to the soon-to-be Constituent Assembly President Rajendra Prasad, engaging with Rau’s note.
Munshi began by distilling Rau’s concerns into two key questions: First, can the Assembly convene in the absence of League? Second, whether the Assembly could take decisions in the absence of the League?
On the first, Munshi argued that the Cabinet Mission Plan did not recognize the right of a certain group to participate in the Assembly. Further, he said that the Assembly ‘is clearly representative of the population of India as a whole and not a conference of representatives of certain groups’. For him, the Assembly was not ‘a body of delegates representing different communities’. It was instead:
‘an organ of the sovereign people, which being elected by the sovereign people, inherits a part of that sovereign power so far as constitution-making is concerned. The idea that such a meeting ground of delegates, representing different groups come to negotiate between themselves. Negatives the idea of a Constituent Assembly.’
On the second question, Munshi felt that there was nothing in the Cabinet Mission Plan which indicated that ‘the Assembly must act unanimously or by quorum’. He went further to say that ‘the whole fabric of the Assembly if the absence of a single member reduces it to impotence’. He argued that the American and Australian constitution-making processes too took decisions and even adopted their Constitutions in the absence of some Assembly members.
The Assembly seems to have been convinced. The next day it sat for the first time. But the question of the League’s absence did not go away and was brought up during discussions around the Objectives Resolution. Eventually, by the end of January 1947, it was clear that the League would not come on board. From this point onwards, the League’s absence was never really brought up again, and the Assembly went ahead with its work to draft the Indian Constitution.

Tags Indian Independence MovementIndian Constituent AssemblyMuslim LeagueCabinet Mission Plan 








Suggested Reading


1946 | B. R. Ambedkar on the Muslim League’s Absence from the Constituent Assembly










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















