






























Provincial Constitution Committee - Constitution of India
























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 







Home
								 ≫ 
												Committees
								 ≫ 
										Provincial Constitution Committee


 






Constitution Making 
Committees

Provincial Constitution Committee




















This committee was set up to discuss and provide for a model Provincial  Constitution, which would determine the system and form of government at the provincial level.


 





Members




 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 







 



 



 





										Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel (Chairperson), 										
										P. Subbarayan, 										
										B.G. Kher, 										
										Kailash Nath Katju, 										
										Jairamdas Daulatram, 										
										Rafi Ahmed Kidwai, 										
										Hansa Jivraj Mehta, 										
										Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, 										
										H. C. Mookherjee, 										
										C. M. Poonacha, 										
										B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, 										
										Kiran Sankar Roy, 										
										Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri, 										
										Diwan Chaman Lall, 										
										Ujjal Singh, 										
										Shankarrao Deo, 										
										Satyanarayan Sinha 



Meeting DatesMay 5, 1947June 6, 1947June 8, 1947June 9, 1947June 11, 1947 


 




Background


According to the Cabinet Mission Plan of 1946, a three-tier system of government had been agreed upon for the new constitution of an independent India. The Union government would only be responsible for matters related to foreign affairs, defense, and communication, with all other powers residing with the Provinces. The Provinces had the choice of ceding power to either the Union or the Groups of Provinces, which made up the second tier of government.
The Constituent Assembly adopted a resolution on 30 April 1947, to establish two committees to determine the main principles of the Union Constitution and a model Provincial Constitution. On 4 May 1947, 21 members were nominated to the Provincial Constitution Committee.
However, the political situation had drastically changed by then. On 3 June 1947, British Prime Minister Clement Attlee announced the partition of India, rendering the three-tier structure proposed by the Cabinet Mission Plan irrelevant. On June 5 and 7, 1947, the two Committees met and decided to create a federal Constitution for India, but with a strong central government.




Work Summary


The Provincial Constitution Committee held its first meeting on 5 May 1947, during which Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was unanimously elected as Chairman. However, by the time the Committee met again on 6 June, partition had been announced. The Committee discussed the model Provincial Constitution prepared by the Constitutional Advisor, B.N. Rau, with a particular focus on the role and functions of the Governor. These discussions led to the broader question of the nature of federalism in India, and it was decided that a joint meeting with the Union Constitution Committee was necessary to discuss this matter.
The joint meeting was held on 7 June, during which it was decided that there would be a Parliamentary Cabinet-type of government at the provincial level, headed by a Governor appointed by the Province and elected by a special electoral college (this was ultimately not included).
On June 9, two sub-committees were formed, one to look into the composition of the special electoral college, and the second on the composition of second chambers in provincial legislatures. The second question had caused some controversy, with most members not in favour of a second chamber at all. However, it was decided that this matter should be left to representatives of the individual provinces themselves, with the Committee only deciding on the composition of such a chamber.
On June 11, the Committee finalized the manner of appointment of High Court judges. The recommendations of the two sub-committees were accepted, with direct election of the Governor and the composition of second chambers. Finally, the Committee adjourned sine die with the decision to prepare a report for circulation in the Constituent Assembly.




Key Documents



Memorandum on the Principles of a Model Provincial Constitution prepared by the Constitutional Adviser, 30 May 1947
Report of the Provincial Constitution Committee, 27 June 1947





Resources



The Framing of India’s Constitution 1966, Vol. 2 by Shiva Rao
The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation by Granville Austin




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















