






























Jivraj Narayan Mehta - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Jivraj Narayan Mehta


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Jivraj Narayan Mehta
1886 - 1978




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Gujarati
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Dr. Jivraj Narayan Mehta, was born on 29 August, 1886 in Amreli district in Gujarat. He pursued medicine at Grant Medical College, Bombay and completed the course with many accolades. Mehta was one of two persons who qualified for the prestigious fellowship from the Tata Education Foundation which he used for his postgraduate study at the University of London. He secured the prestigious University of London Medal for his MD thesis which then granted him membership to the Royal College of Physicians in 1915.
Mehta and M.K. Gandhi were in London at the same time and attended conferences together. Later, Gandhi would become one of Mehta’s patients. When he returned to India, Mehta was appointed the Dean, Medical College at the King Edward VII Memorial Hospital, Bombay.
His professional accolades continued to accumulate: he served as the President of the Indian Medical Association and All India Medical Conference, 1930, as a Member of the Bombay Medical Council, (1931-32) and Medical Council of India (1938—42). Mehta helped establish the Kamala Nehru Memorial Hospital and was a Member of its Board of Trustees and Executive Council since its inception in 1940.
He was married to Hansa Jivraj Mehta in 1924.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Mehta was a close associate of many national leaders and actively participated in the Non-Cooperation and Quit India Movements. He served time in prison on two occasions (1932-1933 and 1942-1944).
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Mehta was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bombay through a Congress party ticket.
Later Contributions:
Mehta served as the Director-General and Secretary of Health Services to the Ministry of Health, Government of India from 1947-48. He was the Diwan of the erstwhile State of Baroda in 1948. Mehta served as the President of the Indian Conference of Social Work (1950 and again in 1952-54) as well as the Medical Council of India again (1947- 1963).
Mehta helped establish the Institute of Management at Ahmedabad in 1961 and served as the Chairman of its Council until 1963. He was the Vice-Chairman of the Gandhi Memorial Leprosy Foundation since 1952.
He served on multiple scientific committees in India. Some of them include – Scientific Advisory Board, Indian Council of Medical Research, (1953—1956), Atomic Research Committee (1953—1960), Board of Scientific & Industrial Research, C.S.I.R., (1942—1962) and the Governing Body, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, (1958—1962).
Later, Mehta served as the Minister for Finance, Industry and Prohibition for the Government of Bombay in 1952. He became the first Chief Minister of the state of Gujarat in 1960 and continued in office till 1963. Subsequently, he was appointed as the Indian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom in 1963-66.
He passed away on 7 November 1978.
Key Writings:
Mehta wrote on the human body and health including:

Studies regarding presence of Glycogen in Suprarenal bodies—Lancet (London), 1917;
Height, Weight, Chest Measurments relating to some school children (male) in Bombay; and
“Sarabhai Oration” on “Health Services in India—a review of the past, present and problems, facing the future”,1967.



 



Resources



‘A tribute to the indomitable spirit of Jivraj Mehta.’ J Postgrad Med 2006, Goenka AH, Kulkarni H S.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















