






























Frank Anthony - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Frank Anthony


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Frank Anthony
1908 - 1993




Key Information

Party: All-India Anglo Indian Association
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Christian
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Committee on the Rules of Procedure 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Frank Anthony was born on 25 September 1908 in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh. He studied at Nagpur University and pursued law in London where he was called to the Bar by the Inner Temple Inn.
Anthony went on to become one of the prominent members of the Anglo-Indian community, becoming the head of the All India Anglo-Indian Association in 1942. Further, he was appointed as the Chairman of the Inter-State Board for Anglo-Indian Education. The Board was set up in 1935 to ensure coordination and standardization of European, Eurasian and Anglo-Indian schools in India.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Anthony was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Central Provinces and Berar. In the Assembly, he took part in discussions on national language and minority rights.
Later Contributions
Anthony established the All India Anglo-Indian Educational Trust which owns and administers five schools that are named after him – The Frank Anthony  Public School.
He served as a nominated member of the Lok Sabha for seven terms between 1950 and 1992.
Anthony passed away in 1993. 
Key Writings
He wrote Britain’s Betrayal in India – Story of the Anglo Indian Community. It aimed to comprehensively chronicle the history of the Anglo-Indian community in India. As Anthony himself noted, the book rather than being a ‘historical record’, narrated the cultural and social story of the Anglo-Indian community.


 



Key Speeches



When the Assembly was debating the question of a national language, Anthony invoked a utilitarian principle arguing to make Hindi with Roman script as the national language. However, he sought to introduce measures to ensure that the medium of instruction in State universities and official languages in the courts cannot be changed without Parliament’s sanction.
Anthony mounted a defence in favour of India being a part of the Commonwealth of Nations. He pointed out that India should not be in an international vacuum and should use this opportunity to emerge as a leader of Asia.
During debates around minority rights, Anthony expressed deep gratitude to the Advisory Committee for recognising the Anglo-Indian community and providing constitutional safeguards.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















