






























Mahavir Tyagi - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Mahavir Tyagi


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Mahavir Tyagi
1899 - 1980




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: No Formal Education



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Mahavir Tyagi was born on December 31, 1899, in Moradabad, Uttar Pradesh. He was educated at Nanakchand High School, Meerut and thereafter was tutored privately. Tyagi did not pursue formal higher education. As he grew older, he reflected on his education and developed a dislike for the modern education systems. He believed universities were exploitative spaces.
He served in the British Indian Army until 1920. After the Jallianwala Bagh massacre, Tyagi resigned from the army. Soon, he joined the Non-Cooperation Movement and played an active role in the Indian Independence Movement.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Tyagi was an avid follower of Mahatma Gandhi and took part in many nationalist movements including the Kisan movements in Uttar Pradesh. He was convicted several times for his political participation including for the offence of sedition.
He was a Member of the All-India Congress Committee for nearly 39 years. He was a vibrant leader and active legislator. He was a member of the United Provinces Legislative Assembly for 9 years. Interested in social reforms, Tyagi also became a Member of a Committee governing land reforms and social justice in tribal areas of the United Provinces.
During his tenure in the Legislative Assembly, he set up the ‘Tyagi Police’ in Uttar Pradesh to control the violence that took place in 1947 resulting from the partition of India.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Mahavir Tyagi was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress Party ticket. He contributed to discussions on detention, taxation and emergency powers of the President.
Later Contributions
Tyagi was elected for two terms as a Member of Parliament from Dehradun (1952-62).  He was the Minister, Revenue and Expenditure (1951-1953) during which he introduced a scheme for voluntary disclosure of income.
He also took on key administrative roles like the Chairmanship of the Direct Taxes Administration Enquiry Committee (1958–59) and Public Accounts Committee in June 1962.
Tyagi passed away on 22 May 1980 in New Delhi.
Key Writings
Mahavir Tyagi had written a booklet on proportional representation. He authored his memoirs in Hindustani and the same was published in two volumes in 1960- Ve Kranti Ke Din and Meri Kaun Sunega.


 



Key Speeches



A strong advocate of vesting emergency powers in the President, Tyagi urged that the Centre must be armed with such powers.
He rejected the need for a detention clause in the Constitution. He felt that the introduction of such a clause would transform the framework of Fundamental Rights into a rigid penal code.
A proponent of a fiscally strong centre, Tyagi recommended a uniform tax system for levy of sales tax and wanted the Union Government to levy such taxes.



 



Resources



Personalities: A Comprehensive and Authentic Biographical Dictionary of Men who Matter in India, (Arunam and Sheel, 1950)
Members Bioprofile, Third Lok Sabha



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















