






























The Making of India's Constitution - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Video
								 ≫ 
										The Making of India’s Constitution


 

















 





Video




 




The Making of India’s Constitution

August 15, 2021






This animated video take us through India’s Constitution making process. It helps us understand that key political, economic and social choices our framers made for our new republic!
Design & Direction – Snigdha Rao, Rituparna Sarkar
Art – Priyankar Gupta
Animation – Janhavi Chaudankar, Avinash Jadhav
Voice- Prerna Chawla
Sound Design- Joseph D’Souza
Transcript
We, the people, having solemnly resolved to constitute India, battled the British for over a century on the streets, and in the courts and assemblies, to realise our collective desire for freedom from colonial authoritarian rule.
This found an early voice in 1895 with the Swaraj Bill, which demanded a dominion state with equality for all and freedom of speech. In 1928, Motilal Nehru’s report went further to call for self-governance and minority rights.
However, both demands fell on deaf ears. So on 26 January 1930, the Indian National Congress declared ‘Poorna Swaraj’, or complete independence, discarding the demand for dominion status.
A year later at its Karachi session in 1931, the INC demanded comprehensive social and economic rights. Sensing imminent change, M.N. Roy proposed a Constitution drafted by a Constituent Assembly of Indians, by Indians and for Indians. The INC embraced this view and after years of relentless negotiations with the British, a Constituent Assembly was created in 1946.
Nearly 300 members representing all shades of political opinion, diverse religions, ethnicity, and from all over India met in the plenary assembly and subcommittees across three years, to draft India’s Constitution. They made deliberate and radical constitutional choices to first — transition India from a colonial authoritarian state to a constitutional democratic republic, with adult franchise and representative legislators and independent courts to maintain the rule of law.
Second — to transform a traditional society built on caste hierarchy and patriarchy into a modern egalitarian society based on every individual’s dignity and fraternal relations between them all.
Third — usher in a multi-religious secular democracy by assuring individual freedom of religion, and keeping the state away from organized religion.
And lastly — to restructure a feudal economy based on concentrated or inherited wealth and large land holdings, by distributing land and other economic resources, and ensuring social and economic welfare.
Finally, this new constitutional republic was born on 26 January 1950. Seven decades later, our constitutional republic needs you to be a Constitution defender to preserve, protect and realise the progressive constitutional dream to build a new India.

















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















