






























Hasrat Mohani - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Hasrat Mohani


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Hasrat Mohani
1875 - 1951




Key Information

Party: All-India Muslim League
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Urdu
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Syed Fazl-ul-Hasan, famously known as Hasrat Mohani was born in 1875 in Mohan village in Unnao District in the United Provinces. He earned his B.A. from Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh.
While in college, Mohani became involved in writing and journalism and became the editor of the Urdu monthly Urdu-e-Mualla. He also started an Urdu newspaper, Mustaqil.
Mohani worked with a number of political parties: he became a member of the Congress in 1903, but later became active in the Muslim League. In 1946, he won the 1946 Provincial Assembly elections on a League ticket. Despite his association with the League, he was staunchly opposed to partition. He was also one of the founding members of the Communist Party of India.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Mohani actively participated in the freedom struggle and was imprisoned on several occasions. He also played an important role in the Khilafat movement.
In 1921, Mohani along with Swami Kumaranand moved a resolution at the annual session of the Congress Party, where he called for complete independence. This was in contrast to the prevailing demand of the freedom struggle for dominion status. Although other members of the Congress party were initially against this, it was ultimately adopted in the Declaration of Purna Swaraj of 1930. He also made a similar demand before the Muslim League in 1921.
He is well-known for coining the slogan “Inquilab Zindabad” which was popularly used by freedom fighters.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Mohani was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Muslim League Ticket. After partition, he was one of the 28 members of the Muslim League who remained in India and attended the meetings of the Constituent Assembly. In the Assembly, he intervened in a number of debates including on federalism, the Preamble, reservations for religious minorities, and abolition of the Zamindari system.
Later Contributions:
Mohani passed away on 13th May 1951.
Key Writings:
A versatile writer and poet, some of Mohani’s publications include Kulliyat-e-Hasrat Mohani, Sharh-e-Deewan-e-Ghalib, Mushahidaat-e-Zindan, and Nikat-e-Sukhan.


 



Key Speeches



Mohani advocated for a federalist structure rather than a unitary form of government with a strong centre.
During the debates on the Preamble, he expressed his dissatisfaction with the final text of the Constitution. He targeted the Drafting Committee for failing to adhere to the Objectives Resolution when drafting the Constitution.
He also argued against reservations for Muslims and the formation of political parties on communal lines.
Mohani also staunchly supported the abolition of the Zamindari system.



 



Resources



Maulana Hasrat Mohani: A Political Study by Mohammed Umar (2009).
Hasrat Mohani: A Critical Appraisal of His Political Career and Ideology by Mohammad Arshad (2009).
Hasrat Mohani: The Freedom Fighter by Shafqat Rizvi (1988).
Hasrat Mohani by Khalid Hasan Qadiri (1985).
Hasrat Mohani by  Muhammad Sidiq (1985).



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















