






























R.V. Dhulekar - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										R.V. Dhulekar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
R.V. Dhulekar
1891 - 1980




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life:
Raghunath Vinayak Dhulekar was born on 6th January 1891 in Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh.
He completed his graduation in English from Presidency College, Calcutta and further studies from Government College, Patna. After finishing his Bachelors of Law from University Law College, Allahabad he set up his practice at Jhansi District Court. In the year 1912, he married Shrimati Jankibai.
Dhulekar played a significant role in India’s Independent Movement. He was a member of the Provincial Health Board (United Provinces) and Board of Sanskrit Studies (United Provinces). He was appointed as the Chairman of Jhansi Municipality and Board of Indian Medicine (United Provinces). Dhulekar was also assigned the position of Convener of Finance Committee, Government of United Provinces.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Dhulekar took active part in India’s National Movement & the Salt March. He underwent various terms of imprisonment and house arrests for participating in several independence movements.
In 1921 he gave up his law practice and actively joined the Non Cooperation Movement. Between 1924-1928, he worked towards removal of untouchability and was the founding member of several educational institutions. He was also the founding president of Jhansi Ayurvedic University and Bundelkhand Ayurvedic College, Jhansi.
Dhulekar held many significant positions in Indian politics including Member of the Legislative Assembly (United Provinces) between 1936 to 1940. He was a member of U.P.C.C. and A.I.C.C. on several occasions. He was also appointed as the Secretary of U.P.P.C.C. between 1921 – 1924. He held the position as the Chairman of Reception Committee, Provincial Political Conference of Congress, 1928.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
R. V. Dhulekar was appointed to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress Party ticket. He made important interventions in the debates regarding the prohibition of cow slaughter and Hindi as the official language of Independent India, arguing against separate electorates & reservations of seats as ‘minorities have nothing to fear’ in the Independent India.
Later Contributions:
Dhulekar was a Member of the Parliament between 1952-1957 from the Constituency of Jhansi District, South Uttar Pradesh. He was also elected as the Chairman of Uttar Pradesh Legislative Council, Lucknow between 1958-64.
He passed away on 1st January 1980.
Key Writings:
Dhulekar had a few publications under his name: Dominion Status vs. Independence in English, Council Sudhar in Hindi, and the Hindi Year Book from 1929 to 1942.


 



Key Speeches



Dhulekar was a strong proponent of making Hindi the official language of India. He was strongly against using any other language, and moved an amendment stating that the Procedure Committee should make all the rules in Hindi with a translation in English and the Hindi version should be considered as the authentic one.
He stated that prohibition on cow slaughter/cow protection should be included in the Fundamental Rights.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















