






























Why India's Constitution Framers Hated the Sedition Law - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Why India’s Constitution Framers Hated the Sedition Law


 
















Why India’s Constitution Framers Hated the Sedition Law



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






13 May 2022

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

On 11 June 2022, the Supreme Court permitted the Union to re-examine the constitutional validity of Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, which criminalizes sedition. 74 years ago, the Constituent Assembly examined the same law. Its position was clear: sedition law had no place in India’s constitutional and political future.
The Draft Constitution of India 1948 contained a right to freedom of speech and expression. This right, however, did not protect speech relating to ‘libel, slander, defamation, sedition or any other matter which offends against decency or morality or undermines the authority or foundation of the State’. On 1 December 1948, the Constituent Assembly took up the Draft Constitution’s free speech provision for discussion. K.M. Munshi moved an amendment to drop ‘sedition’ as a ground to restrict free speech.
He brought the Assembly’s attention to Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code. He recounted how this law loomed large over Indians for more than half a century. The British colonial government had arbitrarily deployed the law to punish Indians for innocuous expressions of discontent and criticism aimed at the colonial government. Section 124A was the tool to deny liberty and political freedom to Indians.
Another member Seth Govind Das narrated a personal story. His great-grandfather – a royal – had helped the British during the first Indian independence war of 1857. For this, the British felicitated his grandfather. In 1930, during the Satyagraha Movement, Das criticized his grandfather for helping the British and contributing to the continued existence of the ‘alien government’. Das was promptly slapped with a sedition charge that came with a 2-year jail term.
Rohini Kumar Choudhary argued that India’s sedition law ‘has been responsible for a lot of misery in this country and had delayed for a considerable time the achievement of our independence’. Gandhi himself was charged with sedition. At his sedition trial, Gandhi referred to Section 124A as the ‘prince among the political sections of the Indian Penal Code designed to suppress the liberty of the citizen’.
In his speech, Munshi felt that if the Assembly did not drop sedition as a ground to restrict free speech in the Draft Constitution, then ‘an erroneous impression would be created that we want to perpetuate 124-A of the I. P.C. or its meaning which was considered good law in earlier days‘. The Assembly agreed and accepted his amendment. The Constitution made no mention of sedition.
But sedition remained in the Indian Penal Code. Parliament never attempted to repeal it. And in what would have been quite a shock to Munshi and his fellow Assembly members, the Supreme Court in 1962 declared Section 124-A as constitutionally valid in Kedar Nath Singh v State of Bihar.
Now in 2022, will Parliament and the Court come closer to a conclusion similar to our framers on the future of sedition law in India?

Tags Indian Independence MovementIndian Constituent AssemblyIndian Judiciary 








Suggested Reading


“The Advocate” | Film Screening & Discussion










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















