






























Hari Vinayak Pataskar - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Hari Vinayak Pataskar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Hari Vinayak Pataskar
1892 - 1970




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Marathi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early life
Hari Vinayak Pataskar was born in Indapur, Poona on May 15, 1892. He studied at New English School, attended Fergusson College in Poona and ultimately attained his BA., L.L.B from Government Law College in Bombay. In 1920, he joined the Indian National Congress, and became an active participant in regional politics. He was elected to the Bombay Council in 1926.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
A qualified lawyer, he offered free legal services to political prisoners between 1925 to 1945. Pataskar was jailed in 1942 due to his involvement in the Quit India movement. He later became a member of the Bombay Legislative Assembly on two different occasions.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Pataskar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bombay on a Congress party ticket. He was a very active member of the Assembly and made interventions in the debates on preventive detention, due process, and anti-discrimination.
Later Contributions
In 1952, Pataskar was elected to the Lok Sabha from Jalgaon and was appointed the Law Minister of the country. His major achievement as Union Law Minister was the introduction of the Hindu Code Bill. Subsequently, he served as the Public Aviation Minister from 1955 to 1957.
Pataskar was appointed as the Governor of Madhya Pradesh, a position he held for seven years and seven months, making him the longest serving Governor of the state. During his tenure, he was awarded the Padma Vibhushan.
He passed away on 21st February, 1970.


 



Key Speeches



Considering the failure of the Assembly to accept the ‘due process of law’ clause in the right to life, he proposed a wide variety of amendments to Article 21 and 22 which had the effect of greater protections for personal liberty. He argued in favour of protections for detained persons, including the requirement that they be produced before a magistrate “within 24 hours” rather than “as soon as possible”.
Pataskar contributed to discussions on due process and bringing uniformity in the law between the State and the Centre.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















