






























Ranganath Ramachandra Diwakar - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Ranganath Ramachandra Diwakar


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Ranganath Ramachandra Diwakar
1894 - 1990




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bombay
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Kannada
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Ranganath Ramachandra Diwakar was born on 30 September 1894 in Dharwad, Karnataka. He completed his M.A. and L.L.B from Fergusson College in Pune and began working as a Professor of English. From 1916 to 1920, he taught English at Rajaram College (Kolhapur) and K.E. Society’s Arts College (Dharwad).
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Diwakar’s first foray into the freedom struggle happened quite early as a young school kid witnessing the 1905 Swadeshi movement. In a 1970 interview, he reminisces volunteering with the movement in an atmosphere permeated with patriotism and also shaped by larger world events. His interest in the fight for Swaraj was inspired by such events as Japan’s victory over Russia in 1905 and figures such as Éamon De Valera and Michael Collins of the Irish freedom struggle, and Giuseppe Mazzini and Giuseppe Garibaldi of the Italian nationalist movement.
The Non-cooperation Movement of the early 1920s spurred Diwakar to drop teaching and instead begin a career in journalism. In 1921, he founded Karmaveer, a Kannada weekly popular for its radical views and powerful language. This landed him in prison in 1923 for a year, under charges of sedition.
After being released from jail, Diwakar proceeded to work closely for the unification of the Kannada speaking regions spread throughout different provinces into a single administrative unit. In fact, he was the sole member of the Karnataka Provincial Congress Committee to represent the case for uniting Karnataka to the Nehru Committee set up to draft a constitution in 1928. The following year he took up the cause of spreading the use of Hindi and Khadi as part of a larger movement towards national integration. He was subsequently made the President of Dharwad’s Hindi Prachar Sabha. Throughout his life, Diwakar remained a close follower of Gandhi and his teachings, maintaining correspondence with him on the ways and means to take forward the freedom struggle.
Diwakar became the President of the Karnataka Provincial Congress Committee in 1930. During his tenure as President, he was imprisoned for his participation in the Salt Satyagraha movement and the No-Tax Campaign in Karnataka. He was in and out of jail until 1934, when the Civil Disobedience Movement was withdrawn. Diwakar was also heavily involved with the elections to the Central Legislature in 1935 and was the Secretary of the Parliamentary Board with the responsibility to choose the Congress candidates for the election. But he personally chose to not stand for elections until independence was fully achieved. Diwakar’s participation in the Quit India Movement again sent him to jail multiple times until 1944.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Diwakar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Bombay province on a Congress Party ticket. While he did not actively participate in the Constituent Assembly, he did speak in the Assembly a few times.
Later Contributions
Diwakar was the Indian representative to the Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference held in Rome in 1948. From 1950 to 1952, he was a member of the Provisional Parliament. He also served as the convenor of the All-India Congress Committee and the Kannada Sahitya Parishad.
Diwakar was part of the Nehru government between 1949-52 where he served as the Union Minister of State for Information and Broadcasting. He was elected as a member of the Rajya Sabha in 1952, but resigned within 2 months. He was subsequently appointed as the Governor of Bihar in 1952 (until 1957). In 1962, he was nominated to the Rajya Sabha and would remain a member until 1968.
His engagement with Gandhian teachings continued till the end of his life. After independence, he served as the Chairman of the Gandhi National Memorial Trust, Gandhi Peace Foundation and the Gandhi Memorial Leprosy Foundation.
He passed away on 12 March 1990.
Key Writings
Diwakar was a prolific writer in Kannada, English and Hindi. His writings such as Upanishad Prakash and Vachana Shastra Rahasya give a glimpse of his scholarship in Kannada. He published a book called United Karnataka which tried to build a case for the unification of Karnataka. He was also the chief editor of the publications Bihar Through the Ages (1958) and Karnataka Through the Ages (1968).
In addition to his Kannada weekly Karmaveer, he was the editor of the daily Samyukta Karnataka and the monthly Kasturi. The three publications were produced by the People’s Education Trust of which he was the lone trustee.
Diwakar wrote widely on Gandhi and his philosophy. Some of these works are My Encounter with Gandhi (1989), Satyagraha: The Power of Truth (1948), Glimpses of Gandhiji (1949) and Saga of Satyagraha (1969).


 



Key Speeches



During the discussion on the Draft Constitution, Diwakar pleaded that the Constitution must be passed in the English language.
He spoke strongly in favour of equal opportunity for all and wanted the prohibition on discrimination on the grounds of religion, race, caste or sex to extend to schools, colleges and other State-aided institutions.



 



Resources



Audio archive of R.R. Diwakar’s interview by Uma Shanker (Centre for South Asian Studies, University of Cambridge)
Foreign Friends of India: Lord Mountbatten – Talk by R.R Diwakar (All India Radio Bengaluru, 1969)
Nene Nene Aa Dinava – Kannada talk by R.R. Diwakar (All India Radio Madikeri)
Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India)
Karmaveer Divakar by R.K. Joshi (Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1996)
Ranganatha Divakara by Manoja Patila (Kannaḍa Pustaka Pradhikara, 2011)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















