






























P. Govinda Menon - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										P. Govinda Menon


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
P. Govinda Menon
1908 - 1970




Key Information

Party: 
Constituency: Travancore-Cochin
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Malayalam
Education: Postgraduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Panampilli Govinda Menon was born in Trichur, Kerala on 1 October 1908. He studied at St. Thomas College Thrichur and completed his Honours Degree in Physics from St. Joseph’s College, Trichi. He also studied law from Law College, Madras after which he practised in the lower courts and the High Court of Kerala.
He was elected to the Cochin State Legislature (1935 and1938). He resigned from this post in 1942 to protest the repressive policy of the Cochin Government. Menon was re-elected again to the Legislative Assembly of Cochin (1945). He served as the Food Minister of Cochin (1946) and as the Chief Minister of Cochin (1947).
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Even as a student Menon was involved in politics and actively participated in Vaikom Satyagraha, an anti caste struggle in Kerala. He joined the Prajamandalam as he got more involved in politics and later joined the Indian National Congress. Menon served as a member of Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee and the All India Congress Committee. He took active part in the boycott movements in Kerala.
Contribution to Constitution Making
P. Govinda Menon was a representative of the princely state of Cochin in the Constituent Assembly. P. Govinda Menon made a few interventions in the Assembly about princely states.
Later Contributions
Menon was elected as a member to the Legislative Assembly of Kerala again (1948), served as a Finance Minister (1952) and became the Kerala Assembly Congress Party leader. He also served as the Chief Minister of Travancore Cochin State, after they were merged. He was elected to the Lok Sacha in 1962 and was made the Minister of Food, Agriculture, Community Development and Cooperation under Indira Gandhi. He held portfolios of the Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Law and Social Welfare and was also the Law Minister on India in 1967.
Menon played various roles in public affairs and was known for advocating for the under-privileged and for improving the status of teachers. He represented India in various international conferences and continued to work with the Congress even after their split in 1969.
Menon passed away on 23 March 1970.


 



Key Speeches



In one of Menon’s interventions, he moved certain rules about vacancy in the office of Assembly members that he thought were important to be added to the Constituent Assembly Rules.
He believed that the princely state of Cochin always desired to be represented in the Assembly and that it was their duty and right to be able to participate in the deliberations of the Assembly.
He supported the addition of Part VI-A to the Constitution which brought the princely state in line with all the British India provinces. He believed that the Assembly should frame a Constitution for all of India, the states and provinces alike and felt that the desires of all Indians was that India should be united.



 



Resources



Eminent Parliamentarians Monograph Series: Panampilli Govinda Menon (Lok Sabha Secretariat, 1990)
Freedom Fighter Panampilly Govinda Menon (All India Radio, 2022)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















