






























Jagjivan Ram - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Jagjivan Ram


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Jagjivan Ram
1908 - 1986




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Bihar
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Scheduled Caste
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Committee on the Rules of ProcedureAdvisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas+1 moreSub-Committee on Minorities 



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Jagjivan Ram, a Dalit leader popularly referred to as ‘Babuji’, was born on 5 April 1908 in Bihar. He attended high school at Arrah Town School, Bihar where he got the opportunity to interact with Madan Mohan Malviya. Impressed by Ram’s intellect, Malviya, invited him to study at the Banaras Hindu University. Acting on Malviya’s offer, Ram passed the Inter Science Examination at Banaras Hindu University- where he faced discrimination due to his caste. Subequently, Ram graduated with a B.Sc from the University Of Calcutta.
As a student in Calcutta University, he organised a rally for labourers and got the opportunity to interact with nationalists and revolutionary leaders like Chandrshekhar Azad and Manmath Nath Gupta.
Ram was an avid reader- he read in English, Hindi, Sanskrit and Bengali. This love for reading seems to have propelled his interest in politics by exposing him to a wide range of ideas and perspectives.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Ram was active in the nationalist movement as a student. However, his work was not limited to the freedom struggle. He also worked for the emancipation of the Depressed Classes. In the 1930s he was extensively involved in social work like setting up relief camps for victims of the Bihar earthquake in 1934.
He participated in mainstream and popular movements like the Civil Disobedience Movement, Salt Satyagraha and Quit India Movement. He was imprisoned twice for his involvement in these movements.
Ram founded the Khetihar Mazdoor Sabha which focused on securing farmer rights and the All India Depressed Classes League. Through these organisations he wanted to include the Depressed Classes in the nationalist movement and demand for both social reform and political representation. He took on a stronger political role during these years and in the Indian Delimitation (Hammond) Committee hearings, in 1935 Ram stressed on securing voting rights for Dalits.
In 1936 at the age of 28, Ram entered electoral politics. After being nominated to the Bihar Legislative Council in 1936, he contested the Bihar Legislative Assembly elections on a Depressed Classes League ticket. He was appointed as the Parliamentary Secretary in the Ministry of Agriculture, Co-operative Industry and Village Development under the Congress government. However, in 1938 he resigned from the cabinet on the issues of Andaman prisoners and India’s involvement in the Second World War.
In the 1946 General Elections, he won from the constituency of East Central Shahabad. On 30 August 1946, Ram was invited to be a part of the Interim Government- the only Dalit member. He was in-charge of the Labour Ministry.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Ram was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Bihar on a Congress party ticket. He was a member of several crucial committees including the Advisory Committee and Sub-Committee on Minorities Rights. But he did not actively participate in the plenary debates.
Later Contributions
Ram was one of India’s most prolific parliamentarians. Having been elected to the Bihar Legislative Council in 1936 at the young age of 28 years, he holds the distinction of serving as a Member of the Central Legislature and thereafter Parliament for more than 40 years.
During his long political career, he held various portfolios: Minister of Labour (1946-52 and 1966-67); Communications (1952-56); Railways (1956-62); Transport and Communications (1962-63); Food and Agriculture  (1967-70); Defence (1970-74 and 1977-79); Agriculture and Irrigation (1974-77).
At the age of 78, Ram passed away on 6 July 1986 while still a member of the Lok Sabha. His cremation ground is recognized as a memorial – Samta Sthal. Every year on 5 April, India celebrates ‘Samta Diwas’ (Equality Day) to commemorate his birthday.


 



Resources



Jagjivan Ram: The Harijan Leader by S.R. Bakshi (South Asia Books, 1992)
Jagjivan Ram Aur Unka Netritva by R. Prasad (Quality Books, 2022)
A website maintained by the Jagjivan Ram Foundation: http://jagjivanramfoundation.nic.in



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















