






























Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Ramanagara wins Bengaluru Zonals! - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Ramanagara wins Bengaluru Zonals!


 
















Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Ramanagara wins Bengaluru Zonals!



Blog



Editorial Team






22 February 2024

Share









 
The Bengaluru Division Level Quiz was successfully conducted on  20th February 2024 as part of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024 for the students of KREIS Schools. The quiz was conducted in collaboration with CLPR’s Constitutionofindia.net team as the Knowledge partner, and was organised for Karnataka Residential Educational Institutions Society (KREIS) school students.
Students from Ramnagara, Davangere, Tumakuru, Kolar, Chitradurga, Bengaluru Rural, Chikkaballapura, Shivamogga, Bengaluru Urban gathered at the Morarji Desai Residential School, Adakamaranahalli, Bengaluru Urban and participated in a challenging, engaging and exciting quiz! These were the teams which had secured the top score in the online round in their respective districts.

Finalists
Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Solur, Ramanagara grabbed first place, followed by Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Kakanur, Davangere in second place. Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Bhuvanahalli, Tumakuru won third place in the competition. 
About 80 students belonging to 8th, 9th and 10th grades from Morarji Desai Residential School, Adakamaranahalli, Bengaluru Urban watched the quiz as an audience, and also got the opportunity to participate in a fun audience quiz. 

Looking Ahead
The top two teams, the Ramanagara and Davangere Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential Schools have reached the grand finale which will be held in Bengaluru on 25th February 2024. Stay tuned!

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Ilavala, Mysuru Wins Mysuru Zonals!

22 February 2024
												• By Editorial Team

Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Ilavala, and Morarji Desai Residential School, Kallabettu, proceed to the Grand Finale of the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024.


 1 mins										




 

Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Ramanagara wins Bengaluru Zonals!

22 February 2024
												• By Editorial Team

The top two teams, the Ramanagara and Davangere Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential Schools have reached the grand finale which will be held in Bengaluru on 25th February 2024.


 1 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















