






























Chaudhari Khaliquzzaman - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Chaudhari Khaliquzzaman


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Chaudhari Khaliquzzaman
1889 - 1973




Key Information

Party: All-India Muslim League
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Urdu
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Chaudhari Khaliquzzaman was born in Bengal in the year 1889. He studied at the Mohammedan Anglo Oriental College in Aligarh from 1907 to 1917.
Khaliquzzaman was a prominent voices in local politics, having served as the Mayor of Lucknow.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
In 1916, he joined the Home Rule movement under the leadership of Ms. Annie Besant and with the collaboration of Gokhale. He represented the Indian National Congress during the deliberations on the Lucknow pact, which represented the first step towards Hindu-Muslim unity in Indian politics.
He was an active part of the Khilafat and the Non-Cooperation movement, and was arrested in 1921 for organizing a public boycott of the Prince of Wales’ visit to Lucknow. Although he was initially associated with the Congress, he went on to join the Muslim League.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Khaliquzzaman was elected from the United Provinces constituency on a Mulism League ticket. He participated in the deliberations on separate electorates.
Later Contributions
After partition, Khaliquzzaman remained in India for sometime, but eventually left for Pakistan where he held the post of the President of the Pakistan Muslim League until 1950.
He passed away in 1973.
Key Writings
His most notable work was Pathway to Pakistan, published in 1961.
 


 



Key Speeches



Khaliquzzaman delivered an eloquent speech supporting the motion of the pledge moved by Jawaharlal Nehru in the Constituent Assembly.
He participated in the discussions on the topic of the election of ministers and the discretionary powers of governors.
In the discussions on separate electorates, he expressed the view that it was necessary to ensure that the Muslim community was truly represented.



 



Resources



A Witness to the Birth of a Nation, by Vikram Doctor, The Economic Times.
Pathway to Pakistan, by Chaudhari Khaliquzzaman.
Sources of Indian Traditions, ed. by Rachel McDermott et al, Penguin Books.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















