






























Baldev Singh - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Baldev Singh


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Baldev Singh
1902 - 1961




Key Information

Party: Akali Dal
Constituency: East Punjab
Religion: Sikh
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Punjabi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas 



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Baldev Singh was born on 11 July 1902, to a Sikh Family in the village of Dhummna in Ropar District in the erstwhile Punjab province. He was educated in Ambala and at Khalsa College, Amritsar. After graduation, he started working in his father’s steel factory in Jamshedpur.
Singh returned to Punjab in the mid-1930s and joined the Akali Party, where he worked alongside the prominent Sikh leader Tara Singh. He then successfully contested the Punjab Provincial Assembly elections in 1937 from the Ambala Northwest constituency. Singh played a crucial role in the formation of the coalition government between the Akali Party and the Unionist Muslim League in the 1942 Provincial elections. He was the Development Minister for Punjab from 1942 to 1946.
Contribution to Constitution Making
In 1942, Singh was selected to represent the Sikh community in the negotiations with the Cripps Mission. He held a similar position during the 1946 Cabinet Mission, where he opposed partition and asked for safeguards for religious minorities.
Singh was elected to the Constituent Assembly from East Punjab on an Akali Party ticket. He did not actively participate in the debates.
Later Contributions
Singh was appointed as the first Defence Minister in the interim government of India under Jawaharlal Nehru. Along with Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, he was responsible for managing security and relief efforts during partition.
Singh successfully contested the first general elections in independent India, and became a member of the First Lok Sabha on an Akali Party ticket. In 1957, he ran and won a second term as an MP from Hoshiarpur, this time on a Congress party ticket.
Singh died on 29th June 1961.


 



Key Speeches



Baldev Singh (Google Arts & Culture)
Sardar Baldev Singh, 58, Dies; First Defense Minister of India (New York Times, 1961)
Sardar Baldev Singh : First Defense Minister of India by Sukhjit Kaur (Madaan publishing house, 2018)
Baldev Singh’s birth anniversary: Remembering the first Defence Minister and the role he played in India’s Independence (CNBCTV, 2022)
Baldev Singh birth anniversary: Interesting facts about first Defence Minister of independent India (Firstpost, 2022)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















