






























Somnath Lahiri - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Somnath Lahiri


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Somnath Lahiri
1900 - 1984




Key Information

Party: Communist Party of India
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Somnath Lahiri was born on 1st September, 1909 in a middle-class family. He was influenced by communist ideals from a young age, and actively aided in the development of the trade union movement in Bengal alongside Bankim Mukherjee.
He was a part of the Calcutta Tramway Workers Union and the Calcutta Communist party wing. Lahiri was responsible for the formation of the party’s Calcutta Committee, and also participated in the effort to set up the All India Communist party in 1933.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
As a keen member of the Communist party, Lahiri was involved in improving conditions for workers under British rule.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Lahiri was elected to the Constituent Assembly from West Bengal, and was the sole representative of the Communist party. He intervened in the debates relating to fundamental rights, and strongly opposed the participation of former monarchs in the Assembly’s deliberations.
Later Contributions
After independence, Lahiri served as a member of the Bengal state legislative assembly for a period of 10 years between 1957-77. He also held the position of cabinet minister in charge of information and culture for West Bengal in the year 1967. In 1969, he became the minister for local self-government and public works.
Lahiri passed away on October 19, 1984.
Key Writings
A keen writer, one of his most notable publications was a collection of short stories titled Koliyuger Galpo. He was also an accomplished journalist who edited Swadhinate the Bengali-language newsletter for the Communist party.


 



Key Speeches



Lahiri moved two significant amendments to prevent princes and rulers of state from having the power to determine state representation in the Assembly. He argued that they were tools of British Imperialism, who would try to ‘whittle down whatever freedom we may try to evolve’.
During the discussion on autonomy of states, Lahiri delivered a passionate speech which criticized the imposition of a unitary constitution.
He also contributed to the deliberations on the distinction between justiciable and non-justiciable rights, and expressed concerns about the proviso that limited fundamental rights during a ‘grave emergency’.



 



Resources


Remembering Somnath Lahiri on His Birth Centenary (Mainstream Weekly, 2009)


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















