






























Mono Mohan Das - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Mono Mohan Das


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Mono Mohan Das
1910 - 1992




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Bangla
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life
Mono Mohan Das was born in March 1910, in a village called Nawpara in Kolkata, West Bengal. He completed his education at the Central Collegiate School, City College and Calcutta Medical College, Calcutta (now Kolkata) and had an M.B.B.S degree. He was a medical practitioner and a house physician for Calcutta Medical College. He worked as a sanitary officer in the Kolkata Corporation. He became a member of the Indian National Congress in 1936.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Das participated in the freedom struggle and he joined the All India Forward Bloc (AIFB) which was a left-wing nationalist political party led by Subash Chandra Bose.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Das was elected to the Constituent Assembly from West Bengal through the Congress Party.
He moved an amendment regarding the addition of a new provision at the end of the article 282. His interventions were mainly about the minority communities in India. He highlighted the need of the village panchayat system to be included as a part the Constitution of India. Das suggested that the abolition of untouchability must be one of the most important fundamental rights. He also made an intervention about the clause 4 of article 149, with respect to census data collection. Lastly he proposed a condition for an officer to be recruited under the Union Government Of India.
Later Contributions
Das became the member of the Provisional Parliament in 1950 to 1952 and the members of the First Lok Sabha from 1952 to 1957; Second Lok Sabha from 1957 to 1962. He was the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Education from December 1953 to April 1956. He also was the Deputy Minister of Education from May 1956 to April 1957; the Deputy Minister of Education and Scientific Research from May 1957 to March 1958 and the Deputy Minister of Scientific Research & Cultural Affairs since April 1958. He joined Congress Party and was elected to the Third Lok Sabha in 1962 from the newly created Ausgram (Lok Sabha constituency).
He took part in social activities such as upliftment of the Scheduled Castes and poor sections of the society. He also was the President of All Bengal Rabidas Association.
Mono Mohan Das passed away on 13th December 1992 at the age of 82 years.


 



Key Speeches



He proposed to the Constituent Assembly members that in order for an officer to be recruited under the Union Government, the candidate must possess a fairly workable knowledge in three languages at least, namely, English, the official language of the Union and a regional language of India different from the official language of the country.
He highlighted the need for recognition of minority communities and talked about how to define them.
He suggested the need for the village panchayat system to be mentioned in the Constitution of India.
He suggested that the abolition of untouchability should be one of the most important fundamental rights.
He also made an intervention about the clause 4 of article 149 and suggested that the records of the 1941 census should be taken as the guidance for the new elections.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















