






























Malati Choudhury - Constitution of India
































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Malati Choudhury


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Malati Choudhury
1904 - 1998




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Orissa
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Female
Mother Tongue: Odia
Education: High school graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Malati Choudhury was born on 26 July 1904, in Calcutta to a family of politicians. At the age of 16, Choudhury refused to join college and complete her education. Instead, in 1921, she was joined Visva Bharti in Shantiniketan. It was here that her views on patriotism and the freedom movement developed. They were also deeply influenced by Tagore. Choudhury moved to Orissa in 1927 and engaged in grassroots works for underprivileged communities. Chaudhary was a Marxist, woman freedom fighter who actively participated in the diverse struggles of oppressed communities in Orissa. She was fondly called Numa by those she inspired.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Choudhury played a vital role in India’s Independence Movement. She was arrested and imprisoned several times (1921, 1930, 1936, 1942) by the British, for her participation in various freedom movement activities.
In 1933, Choudhury started actively participating in the Congress party. Along with her husband, she organised the Utkal Congress Samajvadi Karmi Sangh, the Orissa branch of the All India Congress Socialist Party. Choudhury founded the Post Basic School at Champatimunda, Orissa. In 1946, she set up the Bajiraut Chhatravas to educate the children of freedom fighters and became the president of the Orissa Pradesh Congress Committee. She had a significant impact on freedom struggle movements organised on the local levels.
In 1934, Malati took part in M.K. Gandhi’s padayatra in Orissa. She led the Krisaka Andolan to save farmers from exploitation by landowners and moneylenders. She played a central role in the peasants uprising in Orissa in the 1930s and established the Utkal Provisional Kisan Sabha that worked towards the abolition of the zamindari system.
Contribution to Constitution Making
She was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Orissa through a Congress ticket. However, she resigned from the Assembly that very year to work with Gandhi and because she felt ‘unfit’ for the work. She wanted to continue working on the ground with farmers, Dalits, tribals, and children.
Later Contributions
In 1948, Malati and her husband, along with other freedom fighters, formed the Utkal Navjeevan Mandal in Orissa that worked towards rural development and tribal welfare. She was the President of the Orissa Civil Liberties Committee and condemned the killings of Naxalites.
She strongly opposed state action during the emergency of 1975 which led to her imprisonment. She won multiple awards for her work including The National Award for Child Welfare in 1987, Jamnalal Bajaj Award in 1988, Utkal Seva Sammaan in 1994, and The Tagore Literacy Award in 1995.
Malati Choudhury passed away in 1998 at the age of 93.


 



Resources



Malati Devi Choudhury: One Of The First Women Marxist Leaders In India | #IndianWomenInHistory by Kavya (Feminism in India, 2019)
Role of Malati Choudhury and her Associates in Indian National Movement by Janmejay Choudhury (Odisha Review, 2022)
Malati Devi Choudhury (1904 – 1998) by Priya Ravichandran (15fortherepublic, 2016)



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















