






























K.C. Neogy - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										K.C. Neogy


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
K.C. Neogy
1888 - 1970




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: West Bengal
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Kshitish Chandra Neogy was a politician and lawyer from West Bengal, born in 1888. Not much is known about his early life.
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Neogy was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly (the lower house of the Imperial Legislative Council during British rule in India). Representing the Bengal province, he won elections for the first time in 1920 and then in 1923, 1926, 1930.
He represented the Orissa States at the First and Second Round Table Conferences in November 1930 – January 1931 and September 1931 – December 1931 respectively.
Some highlights of his career as a member of the Imperial Legislative Council included his appointment to the Indian Cinematograph Committee. The Committee was established in 1927, where Neogy along with B.T. Rangachariah (the Chairman of the Committee) and the Honourable Khan Bahadur Sir Ebraim Haroon Jaffer investigated the need for censorship of the Indian film industry.
In 1944, he gave a passionate speech during the proceedings of the Central Assembly about the state of food supply under the British government. He highlighted the lack of attention given to storage of food supply and lamented the lives lost during the 1943 Bengal famine, berating the Imperial government for their apathy.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Neogy was elected to the Indian Constituent Assembly from the Bengal province as a member of the Indian National Congress. He made no interventions during any Assembly debate and wasn’t a part of any Committee.
However, he was indirectly involved in the Constituent Assembly debates on Article 246, according to the Seventh Schedule. As the head of the Advisory Planning Board in 1946, Neogy’s report on planning and development formed an integral part of how the Constituent Assembly decided on the powers of the Union and state governments.
Later Contributions
In 1946, Neogy was named as a member of the Nuclear Commission (called ‘nuclear’ because it was formed during the first session of the UN Economic and Social Council). As the preparatory Committee, Neogy and his fellow members established the bedrock for the drafting of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights. He was also considered as a bridge between the United Nations and India’s government.
Neogy was a member of the Interim Government of India under Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in 1947, appointed as the Minister of Relief and Rehabilitation, and later as Minister for Commerce. As the first head of the Advisory Planning Board in 1946, his report laid the foundation for the formation of the Planning Commission and the development of the Five-Year Plan.
In 1950, Neogy took charge as the second Finance Minister of India after the resignation of R. K. Shanmukham Chetty. However, he only held office for 35 days as he resigned along with Syama Prasad Mookerjee in protest of the Union government passing the Liaquat-Nehru Pact in the same year.
In November 1951, Neogy was appointed by the President of India, Rajendra Prasad, as the chairman of the first Finance Commission of India.
He passed away in 1970.
Key Writings
Neogy wrote an article about Rabindranath Tagore in a collection of articles published by the Open Court in 1917.
A speech by Neogy on the events that led up to Mahatma Gandhi’s arrest in 1942 was published by the India League of America. The speech was delivered in the Indian Legislative Assembly on September 17, 1942.


 



Resources



What Happened After Gandhi’s Arrest (Central Legislative Assembly, 1942)
Report of the Advisory Planning Board (Government of India, June 1947)
The Constituent Assembly of India (Legislative) Debates: Official Report (1948). India: Manager of Publications.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















