






























Desk Brief: Did Indians Participate in Constitution Making? - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										Desk Brief: Did Indians Participate in Constitution Making?


 
















Desk Brief: Did Indians Participate in Constitution Making?



Blog



Editorial Team






29 March 2022

Share









 
									Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

The Constituent Assembly publicly circulated the Draft Constitution 1948 and received feedback and comments. We know this from Shiva Rao’s six-volume The Framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents which contains constitutional proposals from ministries, lawyer groups, and some trade union associations. However, our understanding of the scale and nature of this public engagement is rather limited. In a recent paper, historian Ornit Shani widens and deepens our understanding of how regular Indians participated in the constitution-making process.
Drawing on largely unexplored archival materials, Shani presents a vibrant picture—Indians in their individual and collective capacities reaching out to the Assembly, keen to be part of constitution-making. Through ‘letters, telegrams, proposals, pamphlets, and memoranda’ they put forward their constitutional visions for India, gave candid feedback, and made constitutional demands (Shani, p. 6).
Writing to the Assembly, the Ved Parchar Mandal attached a full-fledged Constitution for India containing provisions that supported inter-caste dining and marriage and barred India from adopting a State religion (Shani, p. 8). Interestingly, an individual named K.V. Sundaresa Iyer, wanted community customs to be protected from State intervention—including the practice of untouchability (Shani, p. 9).
Many wanted to be part of constitution-making in a more substantive way—they demanded a seat in the critical Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights and Minority Rights. These groups included the All-India Conference of Indian Christians, All India Gurkha League, and All India Kashyap Rajput Maha Sabha who wanted the communities they represented to be declared as minorities and demanded special constitutional protections (Shani, p. 14).
The 1948 Draft Constitution made available for purchase. Image Credits: The People and the Making of India’s Constitution (Ornit Shani, 2022)
Public engagement also went beyond communication with the Assembly and took place in newspapers and radio. The booklets of the Draft Constitution 1948 were made available for the public to buy (Shani, p. 19). Specially curated guides and other materials that attempted to document developments in the Assembly proliferated across the public sphere (Shani, p. 16).
We know from Shiva Rao’s volumes that the Assembly spent a lot of time reading and deliberating on the proposals that it received from the general public. Shani tells us that the Assembly secretariat made an effort to try and respond to all the letters it received (Shani, p. 6). But did these proposals shape constitutional design?
Did all this public engagement have any effect on the Constitution of India in 1950? It’s hard to tell, as this requires a deep empirical investigation that tracks all public proposals, and their progress within the multiple stages of constitution-making and involves isolating their impact on constitutional text from other variables.
Nonetheless, the key takeaway from Shani’s paper is that the Indian people in significant measure participated in the Indian constitution-making process albeit obliquely. This has implications for debates in academic and general circles. Many have and continue to argue that the Indian constitution-making was an ‘elite’ project: they point out that the Assembly members were not directly elected and the final constitution was not ratified—the ‘people’ were absent. Shani’s intervention – at the very least – takes the teeth out of these claims.

Tags Constitution Making 

















Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 








More blog posts




 

Our Early Legislators on the Grounds for Divorce

08 May 2023
												• By Siddharth Jha

On 1 May, the Supreme Court made significant interventions in the divorce law governed by the Hindu Marriage Act (HMA), utilising its power under Article 142 to expand the range of grounds on which individuals can seek divorce. Read what our early lawmakers had to say about this subject here.


 2 mins										
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















