






























Muhammad Ismail Sahib - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Muhammad Ismail Sahib


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Muhammad Ismail Sahib
1896 - 1972




Key Information

Party: All-India Muslim League
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Muslim
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches


 





Biography


Early Life:
Muhammad Ismail Sahib was born on 5th June 1896, in Tirunelveli district in the Madras Presidency. He received his education from CMS College and MDT Hindu College in Tirunelveli and later from St. Joseph’s College, Trichy and Madras Christian College.
Ismail established the Young Muslim Society in Tirunelveli Petai in 1909 when he was 14 years old. He also founded the Majlis-ul-Ulama (Council of Islamic Scholars) in 1918. In the same year, he joined the Muslim League, and rose to become the President of its Madras Unit in 1945. Under his leadership, the Muslim League won all 28 seats reserved for Muslims in the 1946 Provincial Elections, and Ismail became the leader of the opposition.
In the 1920s, Ismail went on to become a successful businessman in the leather and meat industries. He held prominent positions in several business and commerce organisations in Madras relating to trade, railways, and excise.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
Ismail was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Madras on a Muslim League ticket. He was one of the 28 members of the Muslim League who stayed behind in India after partition and who participated in the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly. In the Assembly, he intervened in the debates on the official language.
Later Contributions:
Together with other members of the League who remained in India after partition, Ismail formed the Indian Union Muslim League party in 1948, of which he became the first President.
Ismail successfully contested the first elections to the Rajya Sabha and served from 1952-1958. Later, he was elected to the Lok Sabha for two consecutive terms, serving from 1962 to 1970.
Ismail passed away on 5th April, 1972.


 



Key Speeches


Ismail argued in favour of choosing Hindustani as the official language as it was the most widely-spoken language in India.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















