






























U. Srinivasa Malliah - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										U. Srinivasa Malliah


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
U. Srinivasa Malliah
1902 - 1965




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography


 





Biography


Early Life:
Ullal Srinivasa Malliah was born on 21 November 1902 in Mangalore. He studied at St. Aloysius Primary School and the Canara High School. He then earned a degree at the Government College, Mangalore later renamed University College, Mangalore.
18-year-old Mallaiah was part of a 1000 strong crowd that had gathered at Mangalore’s Central Maidan to hear M.K. Gandhi speak. This historical visit to Mangalore was part of Gandhi’s ‘Khilafat Tour’ that covered the Madras Presidency. Inspired by Gandhi’s speech, Malliah joined the freedom movement brushing aside an attractive opportunity to work for his thriving family business.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
In the 1920s and 1930s, Mallaiah consistently volunteered at the Indian National Congress and participated in the Salt Satyagraha and Quit India movements. He was arrested on multiple occasions and often went underground to evade arrest. The Congress Party’s top brass took notice.
Malliah quickly rose to become within the Congress Party at the State and National levels. In 1936, he became a member of the All-India Congress Committee. A year later he became the President of the Dakshina Kannada District Congress Committee and eventually became the General Secretary and Vice President of the Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee. Malliah enjoyed a close relationship with many senior Congress Party members like Jawaharlal Nehru and Kamaladevi Chattopadhyaya.
Contribution to  Constitution Making:
Malliah was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Madras province on a Congress party ticket. He was not an active participant in the Constituent Assembly proceedings.
Later Contributions:
Prior to the first Indian general election, Congress President Nehru appointed Malliah alongside Lal Bahadur Shastri as the General Secretary of AICC. Both were instrumental in the Congress’s dominant electoral victory.
Malliah entered India’s first Lok Sabha from the South Canara constituency. He won the next two general elections from Udupi. While in Parliament, he headed the Lok Sabha’s House Committee and remained a member of the All India Handicrafts Commission from 1952.
He is often celebrated in the Udupi-Mangalore region as a true people’s representative and remains one of the longest serving Parliamentarians from this region. Some of his lasting contributions include the setting up of the Karnataka Regional Engineering College in Surathkal (now named National Institute of Technology Karnataka), the New Mangalore Port and the Mangalore International Airport.
Malliah also established the Mangalore Town Hall, a Mangalore Station of All India Radio and facilitated important railway lines, national highways and bridges. All these contributions earned him the moniker, “Father of Modern Dakshina Kannada District”.
He was well-travelled and enjoyed hobbies ranging from a game of chess to swimming and handicrafts.
Malliah passed away on 19 December 1965 in New Delhi. The Mangaluru division of the Department of Posts released a special postal cover on 27 January 2018 to commemorate his life. Malliah’s statues can be seen installed across the city of Mangaluru, including one at the Town hall and the Mangalore Port.


 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















