






























Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights - Constitution of India


























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 







Home
								 ≫ 
												Committees
								 ≫ 
										Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights


 






Constitution Making 
Committees

Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights




















This sub-committee was set up to draft the fundamental rights provisions of the Constitution.


 





Members




 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





										J. B. Kripalani (Chairperson), 										
										Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, 										
										M. R. Masani, 										
										K. T. Shah, 										
										Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar, 										
										K. M. Munshi, 										
										Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, 										
										B. R. Ambedkar, 										
										Jairamdas Daulatram, 										
										Hansa Jivraj Mehta, 										
										Shankarrao Deo 



Meeting DatesFebruary 27, 1947March 24, 1947April 14, 1947 


 




Background


At its first meeting, the Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas appointed five sub-committees – including one on fundamental rights. The Committee consisted of twelve members and was headed by J.B. Kripalani.




Work Summary


The Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights held three sittings. During the first sitting on 27 February 1947, J.B. Kripalani was elected as the chairman, and the general procedure and order of business were established. The second meeting was scheduled for March 24, primarily to allow members enough time to develop their own proposals and review those submitted by others.
During the second sitting, held from March 24 to 31, the committee extensively discussed the various drafts and notes submitted by its members. On April 3, the sub-committee arrived at conclusions regarding the different clauses on fundamental rights included in the draft report. The draft report, along with an explanatory note, was circulated among members for feedback and suggestions.
At the third sitting, which took place from April 14 to 16, the sub-committee reviewed the draft report and made revisions to certain clauses to incorporate the comments and suggestions. On April 16, the sub-committee submitted its final report to the Advisory Committee.




Key Documents



A Note on Fundamental Rights by Alladi Krushnaswami Ayyar on 14 March 1947
Munshi’s Note and Draft Articles on Fundamental Rights on 17 March 1947
Harnam Singh’s Draft on Fundamental Rights on 18 March 1947
Ambedkar’s Memorandum and Draft Articles on the Rights of States and Minorities on 24 March 1947
Draft Report of the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights on 3 April 1947
Report of the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights on 16 April 1947





Resources



The Framing of India’s Constitution 1966, Vol. 2 by Shiva Rao
The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation by Granville Austin




 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















