






























Dakshayani Velayudhan - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Dakshayani Velayudhan


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Dakshayani Velayudhan
1912 - 1978




Key Information

Party: 
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Scheduled Caste
Gender: Female
Mother Tongue: Malayalam
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life
Dakshayani Velayudhan was born on 15 July 1912 in Mulavukad a small island in the present-day Ernakulam district. She belonged to the Pulaya community, which was assigned to the rear end of the rigorously oppressive caste system. Pulayas were mostly engaged as lowly-paid agricultural labourers, and subjected to a range of humiliations including being barred from using public roads, maintaining a certain distance from upper caste persons, and the women prohibited from covering their upper bodies with any garment.
An important event was held in Kochi in 1913, in the form of the Kayal Sammelanam. Hundreds of Pulayas, including Velayudhan’s family members, came together and met on small boats in Kerala’s backwaters, as they were barred from assembling on land. The event clearly had a significant impact on Dakshayani’s life, who is said to have requested that her biography be titled ‘The Sea has no Caste.’
Role in India’s Independence Movement
Velayudhan was inspired to enter active politics by her family members’ active involvement in civil disobedience movements against upper-caste diktats.
Velayudhan emerged as a fierce critic of Congress politics, writing strongly against them in the All India Scheduled Castes Federation’s (AISCF) weekly journal, Jai Bheem. At the same time, she was also critical of the AISCF and B.R. Ambedkar’s politics, specifically their demand for separate electorates for the Scheduled Castes.
Fierce often sexist attacks, from both Congress and AISCF followed. Fervent petitions were addressed to the Congress high command by opposing her nomination to the Constituent Assembly. In spite of these she was elected to the body in 1946.
In 1945, she had also been nominated to the Cochin Legislative Council.
Contribution to Constitution Making
Velayudhan was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Madras constituency. At the age of 34, she was one of the youngest and the only Dalit woman member of the Constituent Assembly.
In the Assembly, Velayudhan emerged as a strong, independent voice, unafraid to go against popular opinion. Velayudhan made her inaugural intervention during the Assembly’s response to Nehru’s Objective Resolution. Asserting that although there were several models to follow when framing a constitution, she emphasized that the Indian Constitution had a more substantial task than simply mediating the relationship between state and society; it had to overhaul society itself.
Velayudhan also took on B.R Ambedkar and M Nagappa on an amendment that would have required a reserved seat candidate to secure a minimum proportion of votes from Scheduled Caste voters, arguing that this was akin to separate electorates.
Velayudhan held strong views on the type of federalism that India should adopt. Her critique of the Draft Constitution of India 1948 focused on the lack of decentralization and the potential for a strong central government to dominate over state governments. She specifically highlighted the method of appointing Governors of states, which she argued would further centralize power.
Later contributions
Velayudhan was a part of the Provincial Parliament together with her husband, arguably making them the first Dalit couple in the Parliament.
She continued her civil society work with a focus on Dalit rights. In 1977, she set up a women’s rights organization Mahila Jagriti Parishad in Delhi.
In 2019, the Kerala Government instituted the Dakshayani Velayudhan award, which is to be bestowed on women who work towards the empowerment of other women in the state.
She passed away on 20 July 1978, at the age of 66.


 



Key Speeches



During the Objectives Resolution debate (precursor to the Preamble of the Constitution), Velayudhan noted that communalism was antithetical to nationalism. Further, she believed that the emancipation of Harijans depended on adopting a set of ‘moral safeguards’.
Contrary to other members from the minority communities, she opposed separate electorates for Harijans.
Criticizing the centralizing tendency of the Draft Constitution, she called for a more decentralized system that would actually strengthen India’s unity.
She strongly supported the inclusion of a Fundamental Right against exploitation and forced labour, calling out the ‘fascist social structure existing in India.‘
When the Assembly discussed untouchability (Article 17 of the Constitution of India), she argued that the best way to address untouchability was through sustained state propaganda and not through punishment.



 



Resources



Founding Mothers of the Indian Republic: Gender Politics of the Framing of the Constitution by Achyut Chetan, Cambridge University Press, 2022.
“Remembering Dakshayani Velayudhan, the lone Dalit woman in the Constituent Assembly“ by Saritha S Balan, The NewsMinute, 2018.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















