






























Ramnath Goenka - Constitution of India





























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Ramnath Goenka


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Ramnath Goenka
1904 - 1991




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: Madras
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Male
Mother Tongue: 
Education: 



Committee Memberships

							
							None						



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Ramnath Goenka was born on 3rd April 1904 in Darbhanga, Bihar. At a young age, he was sent to Madras to work with his maternal uncle. Thereafter he took a job as a dispatch vendor for the Free Press Journal.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
In the 1930s Goenka was associated with Gandhi and the Indian freedom struggle. In 1934, at the age of 30, inspired by Gandhi’s call for a national newspaper, he acquired shares in the Indian Express and two years later obtained complete control of the newspaper.
The Indian Express became a voice against British rule and went on to become the largest English national daily. As a response to the Quit India movement and British India’s gag order on the press, the Indian Express ran a piece ‘Heart strings and Purse strings’ where Goenka announced the shutdown of the newspaper and declared:
“We cannot publish news relating to our leaders, to the Congress movement, or relating to anything…not even facts which vitally affect the community unless it is contained in a government communique or in a report from our registered correspondent, blessed by a district magistrate. It would be nothing less than fraud on the public for us to send out a paper containing just that and nothing more…the hard fact of the situation is that if we went on publishing, The Indian Express may be called a paper, but cannot be called a newspaper.”
Role in Constitution Making:
Goenka was elected to the Assembly from Madras on a Congress party ticket. He did not actively participate in the proceedings of the Assembly, although he did make an important intervention relating to the taxation of newspapers.
Later Contributions:
Goenka continued heading the Indian Express after Independence. A day after the emergency was imposed, the paper published two blank columns in its front page as a mark of protest. It went on to successfully challenge the pre-censorship order of the Indira Gandhi in 1976. Thereafter, it was critical in bringing to light the impact of the emergency on institutions and public life.
The Ramnath Goenka Memorial Foundation presents annual Ramnath Goenka Excellence in Journalism Awards. These Awards recognise outstanding journalistic contributions and are considered prestigious in the journalism community.
Ramnath Goenka died on 5th October 1991 in Mumbai.


 



Key Speeches


On 9th September 1947, Goenka made an important intervention regarding Entry 88 and 88A of the Draft Constitution (Entry 92 and 92A of the Constitution of India, 1950) which deals with levy of tax on press. He criticized its inclusion and argued that no other constitutions contain an entry for taxing newspapers.


 



Resources



Warrior of the Fourth Estate.
The Goenka Letters: Behind the scenes in The Indian Express.
Ramnath Goenka: A life in Black and White.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















