






























Article 260: Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India - Constitution of India




























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 











View all parts



X


Part I


Part II


Part III


Part IV


Part IVA


Part V


Part VI


Part VII


Part VIII


Part IX


Part IXA


Part IXB


Part X


Part XI


Part XII


Part XIII


Part XIV


Part XIVA


Part XV


Part XVI


Part XVII


Part XVIII


Part XIX


Part XX


Part XXI


Part XXII











Part XI

Article
260



Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India


The Government of India may by agreement with the Government of any territory not being part of the territory of India undertake any executive, legislative or judicial functions vested in the Government of such territory, but every such agreement shall be subject to, and governed by, any law relating to the exercise of foreign jurisdiction for the time being in force.




 
 

VERSION 1




Article 236, Draft Constitution of India (1948)
(1) The Government of India may by agreement with any State for the time being specified in Part III of the First Schedule, but subject to the provisions of this Constitution in regard to the relationship between the Union and such State, undertake any executive, legislative or judicial functions vested in that State.
(2) The Government of India may also enter into such an agreement with the Government of any Indian State not specified for the time being in the First Schedule, but every such agreement shall be subject to, and governed by, the law relating to the exercise of foreign jurisdiction for the time being in force.
Explanation.-In this clause, the expression “Indian State” means any territory, not being part of the territory of India which the President recognises as being such a State.
(3) If an agreement entered into with any State under clause (1) of this article provides for any matter with respect to which provision has been already made in an agreement entered into with such a State under article 237 of this Constitution by the Government of any State for the time being specified in Part I of the First Schedule, then the latter agreement shall, in so far as it provides for such matter, be deemed to be revoked and of no effect on and from the date of conclusion of the former agreement.
(4) On an agreement under clause (1) of this article being concluded between the Union and a State for the time being specified in Part III of the First Schedule-
(a) The executive power of the Union shall extend to any matter specified in that behalf in such agreement;
(b) Parliament shall have power to make laws with respect to any matter specified in that behalf in such agreement; and
(c) The Supreme Court of India shall, subject to the provisions of clause (2) of article 114 of this Constitution, have jurisdiction with respect to any matter specified in that behalf in such agreement.





VERSION 2


Article 260, Constitution of India 1950
The Government of India may by agreement, with the Government of any territory not being part of the territory of India undertake any executive, legislative or judicial functions vested in the Government of such territory, but every such agreement shall be subject to, and governed by, any law relating to the exercise of foreign jurisdiction for the time being in force.




SUMMARY


Draft Article 236 (Article 260, Constitution of India 1950) was first discussed on 13 June 1949 and 13 October 1949. There was no debate on 13 June 1949 and this Draft Article was held over. The Draft Article permitted the Government of India to undertake any executive, legislative and judicial functions in territories that, at the time, were not officially part of the Union of India.
On 13 October 1949, the Drafting Committee Chairman proposed to replace the Draft Article with a more elegant and clear version. The proposed amendment was accepted without debate.
The Draft Article, as amended was adopted on 13 October 1949.


 










We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















