






























This Month in Constitution-Making (January 1947): The Constituent Assembly passes the Objectives Resolution - Constitution of India

































































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												Blog
								 ≫ 
										This Month in Constitution-Making (January 1947): The Constituent Assembly passes the Objectives Resolution


 
















This Month in Constitution-Making (January 1947): The Constituent Assembly passes the Objectives Resolution



Blog



Vineeth Krishna






04 January 2024

Share









 
									Jawaharlal Nehru addressing the Constituent Assembly in 1946. Image credits: Wikimedia Commons								

Jawaharlal Nehru introduced the Objectives Resolution in the Constituent Assembly on 13th December 1946. The Assembly extensively debated the Resolution between the 16th and 19th of December. On 21st December 1946, the Assembly decided to postpone discussions and took up the Resolution once again on 21st January 1947. During these deliberations, it discussed various aspects of the Objectives Resolution and the political context that surrounded it; these included: the absence of the Muslim League and princely states, federalism, minority rights, and socio-economic rights.
On 22nd January 1947, members of the Assembly wanted conversations around the Resolution to close. The President asked Nehru to respond to the debates and complete the discussion.
He began by taking the Assembly back to the moment when he introduced the Resolution (‘weight and solemnity of that occasion’), what it meant to the people and its relation to India’s past and future. He was glad that the Assembly, taking into account the concerns of some members, had postponed the consideration of the resolution to give the Muslim League and the Princely States the chance to join the deliberations; both groups, however, did not do so. He told the Assembly that the door to these groups would continue to be kept open.
Nehru responded to the criticisms from the rulers of princely states about the idea of the sovereignty of the people. He rejected the notion that some human beings had divine authority to rule over others; there was going to be no compromise on rejecting the idea of the divinity of kings.
He had to deal with a tricky situation: he had to send a message to the rulers of the princely states that India was going to be a republic – popular sovereignty of the people was supreme which implied the undermining of monarchical forms of government; at the same time, he had to be careful to not rub the rulers of the princely states in the wrong way – they could opt out of the constitution-making process and the union altogether. He argued that there would be no interference in the internal affairs of the princely states but in the same breath said –
“..we claim in this Resolution to frame a constitution for a Sovereign, Independent, Indian Republic–necessarily Republic. What else can we have in India? Whatever the States may have or may not have, it is impossible and inconceivable and undesirable to think in any other terms but in terms of the Republic of India…”
He then turned toward India’s disposition to the world at large. He argued that while Indians for a long time, since the Purna Swaraj Declaration 1930, had called for severing ties with the British, there was never an intention of isolating India from the rest of the world; India would aim for friendship with the British people and the Commonwealth. Nehru invoked the United Nations Organisation which was in its infancy: while the organization had defects, India would continue to cooperate with it. He further went on to articulate a foreign policy for India – what would later be referred to as ‘non-alignment’.
He went on to speak about the constitution itself. While he hoped the Constitution that the Assembly would frame would be a ‘good’ one, he argued:
‘…but does anyone in this House imagine that, when a free India emerges, it will be bound down by anything that even this House might lay down for it? A free India will see the bursting forth of the energy of a mighty nation. What it will do and what it will not, I do not know, that it will not consent to be bound down by anything…It may be that the Constitution, this House may frame, may not satisfy that free India. This House cannot bind down the next generation, or the people who will dully succeed us in this task…’
Nehru was clear: the Indian Constitution could not be static – it had to respond to the specific needs and aspirations of future generations. He then closed his speech:
‘…May this Resolution bear fruit and may the time come when in the words of this Resolution, this ancient land attains its rightful and honored place in the world and makes its full and willing contribution to the promotion of world peace and the welfare of mankind’
The President of the Assembly signaled to the members that the time had come to vote on the Resolution and hoped that members would vote in favour of it. He read out the Resolution, first in English, then in Hindi; Shri Mohanlal Saksena read out the Urdu translation.
Members of the Assembly then voted in favour of the Resolution and adopted it with all members standing.








Suggested Reading


1946 | Constituent Assembly Debates



Minoo Masani’s Speech on 17 December 1946



1946 | B. R. Ambedkar on the Muslim League’s Absence from the Constituent Assembly










Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
















We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 



















