






























Sucheta Kripalani - Constitution of India






























































Skip to content



 Constitution of India










ReadThe Constitution of India
Back




					THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA					

395 Articles, organised into 25 Parts and 12 Schedules, make up the Constitution of India



							PARTS							

Each Part collates Articles on specific themes. E.g. Fundamental Rights in Part III.



							SCHEDULES							

Each Schedule contains provisions necessary to apply related Articles.





									Original Manuscript									




									Regional Translations									







						HISTORICAL CONSTITUTIONS						

The Constitution of India 1950 was preceded by British authored framework legislation to govern India, and proto-constitutional drafts by several Indian individuals and groups. These Historical Constitutions are archived here.



						CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES						

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by a Constituent Assembly. 167 days of plenary assembly debates from 9 December 1946 to 24 January 1950 are archived here.




Browse digitised, edited and paragraph-numbered versions of critical primary materials related to the Indian Constitution and its origins.



						COMMITTEE REPORTS						

Documents prepared by smaller groups of Constituent Assembly members which conducted preliminary research and advanced recommendations on specific constitutional topics. 



 
 
ExploreConstitution-Making
Back



Travel through the various stage of the constitution-making process, discover the contributions of diverse institutions, and learn more about the framers of the Constitution through their biographies.




						THE CONSTITUTION FRAMERS						

Learn about the members of the Constituent Assembly, the role they played in India’s freedom movement and their contributions to constitution-making.



						STAGES OF CONSTITUTION-MAKING						

A stage-by-stage overview of the drafting of the Constitution of India 1950. Begin with our popular video on the making of the Indian Constitution.




					INSTITUTIONS					

The Constitution of India 1950 was drafted by the collective work of the following institutions:



									CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY									

A 389-member body responsible for drafting India’s Constitution.



									COMMITTEES									

Committees were created by the Constituent Assembly comprising smaller groups of members delegated with various responsibilities.



									CONGRESS ASSEMBLY PARTY									

An unofficial forum consisting of Assembly members belonging to the Indian National Congress that met on the side-lines of the Assembly.





 
LearnDigital ClassroomEngageWritings & Media
Back



Engage
Discover a wide range of writings and original multimedia content, in the form of blogs, podcasts and videos, that offer valuable insights into the history of India's Constitution, highlighting its relevance to current events both in India and worldwide. We rely on our extensive database of primary materials to produce this content.



					Museum					

Explore India’s rich constitutional and political history through a diverse collection of archival images, audio and video.
 
1946 Assembly Debates

 Audio







 


										Blog										

Articles that engage with important political, social and legal developments in India and the world through constitutional and political history.




 


										Podcasts										

Our writings and research brought to life through voice. Also features interviews with scholars and educators.




 


										Videos										

Workshops, talks, and educational videos exclusively produced by us on India’s constitutional origins.






 
 

About Us
Events
Shop
 



Search


 Back
Website
Database
 

 

 






Home
								 ≫ 
												The Constitution Framers
								 ≫ 
										Sucheta Kripalani


 





 



Constituent Assembly Members
Sucheta Kripalani
1908 - 1974




Key Information

Party: Indian National Congress
Constituency: United Provinces
Religion: Hindu
Caste: Non SC/ST
Gender: Female
Mother Tongue: Hindi
Education: Graduate



Committee Memberships

Member: Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas 



 




Biography
Key Speeches
Resources


 





Biography


Early Life:
Sucheta Kripalani was born in Ambala (Punjab) in June 1908. She completed her education at Indraprastha College, Delhi University. Kripalani began her professional career as a teacher of Constitutional History at Banaras Hindu University till 1939. In 1936, she married Acharya Kripalani, a Congress party member and a prominent freedom fighter. She became a member of the Congress Party in 1938 and served as the Secretary, for one and half years, to the Foreign Department and Women’s Section.
Role in India’s Independence Movement:
Kripalani actively participated in the Indian independence movement in the 1940s. That included her involvement in the 1942 Quit India movement- she evaded arrest from the Government, although she was eventually arrested in 1944 and was detained for a year.
Contribution to Constitution Making:
In 1946, Kripalani was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces. She was a member of the Flag Presentation Committee, which presented the first Indian Flag before the Constituent Assembly.
Later Contributions:
As a staunch Gandhian, she accompanied Gandhi to Bengal during the Indian partition riots. Kripalani played a crucial role in the rehabilitation of refugees during the Partition of India: she served as a Secretary to the Relief and Rehabilitation Committee set up by the Congress Party.
Kripalani was one of the first few women parliamentarians in independent India. She was the member of Provincial Parliament (1950-52); First Lok Sabha (1952-56) and Second Lok Sabha (1957-62).
She had a successful political career in Uttar Pradesh and held important profiles including Member of Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly (1943-50) and Minister of Labour, Community Development and Industry, (1960-1963). Kripalani was elected on the Congress party ticket to become Chief Minister of the state, giving her the distinction of being the first female Chief Minister of an Indian State. She served the office from October 1963 to March 1967.
Kripalani was a part of several delegations to foreign countries and organizations. She played a key role in Parliamentary Delegation to Turkey (1954); International Labour Organization (1961), United Nations General Assembly (1949); and the United Nations Seminar on Civic Responsibility and Increased Participation of Asian Women in Public Life (1956). She passed away in 1974.
Key Writings:
Kripalani authored Sucheta: An Unfinished Autobiography which recounts her life up to 1947.


 



Key Speeches


She did not make any intervention in the Assembly.


 



Resources



Sucheta Kripalani: A Biography of her Vision and Ideas.
Chapter 8, Understanding Gandhi: Gandhians in Conversation with Fred J Blum.
My Times – An Autobiography.
Sucheta Kripalani’s Audio Archives.



 

 
 











We are a not-for-profit initiative. Your support is crucial to help us grow and maintain our commitment to providing free and open access constitutional educational resources.

								SUPPORT US								


© 2023 Constitution of India. All Rights Reserved.











 

About Us
Blog
Events
Subscribe
Privacy Policy
 

















