Podcasts - Constitution of India Home ≫ Podcasts Podcasts Welcome to our podcast section dedicated to the rich and fascinating world of India's constitutional heritage. Join us as we delve into the making of India's constitution, explore its various provisions, and engage in insightful conversations with leading constitutional scholars and civil society members. Subscribe Listen now The Making of India’s Constitution Podcast 2 Episodes The Constitution of India 1950 marked the emergence of India as an independent constitutional republic. It was drafted by the Indian Constituent Assembly between 1946-50 and was also shaped by a longer historical and political process that began in the late 1800s and gained momentum in the mid-1940s. Join us in this journey to uncover the ideas, people and events that shaped the Indian Constitution. Through this podcast, we hope to advance a popular understanding of India’s constitutional and political history. View all Episodes The Making of India’s Constitution EP 1 Introduction The Making of India’s Constitution EP 2 The Karachi Resolution, 1931 Listen now Talking Constitution Podcast 2 Episodes Conversations that delve deep into constitutional topics with scholars, lawyers, and other experts who provide their insights and perspectives drawing from their research, teaching, and civil society work. View all Episodes Talking Constitution EP 1 The Karachi Resolution 1931 with Prof. Kama Maclean Talking Constitution EP 2 Art, Social Justice & the Constitution: A Conversation with TM Krishna Listen now The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast Podcast 9 Episodes If you prefer listening to articles rather than reading them, then we have got you covered! Listen to the ConstitutionofIndia.net team analyse contemporary Indian and global developments, drawing on constitutional and political history. View all Episodes The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast EP 1 Indian Constitution Framers Refused to Regulate Religious Attire The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast EP 2 How India Became the First Republic in the Commonwealth The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast EP 3 Chileans Overwhelmingly Reject a New, Progressive Constitution The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast EP 4 Who Should Get Reservations? Latest Episodes The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast EP 9 Independent India’s First Budget The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast EP 8 Why India’s Vice President is Wrong About Parliamentary Sovereignty The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast EP 7 The British Game of Sovereignty The ConstitutionofIndia.net Podcast EP 6 Why Did B.R. Ambedkar Accept the Poona Pact?