Museum - Constitution of India Home ≫ Museum Museum Welcome to our Museum! This page collates images, audios and videos related to Indian Constitutional History from diverse sources. Minoo Masani’s Speech on 17 December 1946 This short audio clip dated 17 December 1946, provides a glimpse of an intervention made in the Constituent Assembly Debates by the firebrand socialist, Minocher Rustom Masani. In this clip, Masani is heard making a powerful speech in favour of the Objectives Resolution moved by Jawaharlal Nehru. Audio Filter By Clear All Category Year Filter Category Year Close Apply Search Sort By 1946 | Constituent Assembly Debates This 10 minute audio recording captures a part of the Constituent Assembly proceedings from 19 December 1946. The voices of Assembly members, Rajendra Prasad (Chairman), Frank Anthony, Jawaharlal Nehru, Kiran Shankar Roy, B.G.Kher and Syama Prasad Mookherjee are heard here. Audio 1946 | B. R. Ambedkar on the Muslim League’s Absence from the Constituent Assembly This clip of B.R. Ambedkar’s 17 December 1946 speech in the Constituent Assembly brings to light the volatility of the period in which the Objectives Resolution was taken up for discussion in the Constituent Assembly. His intervention here was part of the Assembly’s discussion on whether it was appropriate to pass the Objectives Resolution in the absence of the Muslim league. Audio 1946 | Jaipal Singh Munda Congratulates Rajendra Prasad on Being Elected as the Assembly’s President Listen to this fascinating audio recording of Jaipal Singh Munda’s 11 December 1946 speech in the Constituent Assembly, congratulating Rajendra Prasad on his election as the permanent chairman of the Assembly. Singh was a revolutionary political figure, an unrivalled orator and one of the few tribal members in the Assembly. Audio 1947 | Hansa Jivraj Mehta’s Speech Presenting India’s National Flag This archival audio recording from the midnight of 15 August 1947 documents Hansa Jivraj Mehta’s speech while presenting the National Flag to the country on behalf of the women of India. Mehta was one among the 15 women members of the Constituent Assembly and often a strong voice on issues affecting women. Audio 1946 | Dr. Sarojini Naidu’s Constituent Assembly Speech This 10 minute audio clip from 11 December 1946 has Constituent Assembly Member, Sarojini Naidu congratulating Rajendra Prasad on his election as the Permanent Chairman of the Constituent Assembly. Audio Filter