Bhawanji Arjan Khimji - Constitution of India Home ≫ The Constitution Framers ≫ Bhawanji Arjan Khimji Constituent Assembly Members Bhawanji Arjan Khimji 1902 - 1970 Key Information Party: Indian National Congress Constituency: Bombay Religion: Caste: Non SC/ST Gender: Male Mother Tongue: Marathi Education: Graduate Committee Memberships None Biography Resources Biography Early Life Bhawanji Arjan Khimji was born on 20 July 1902 at Khamgaon in Maharastra’s Vidharba region. He pursued inter commerce from R. A. Podar College of Commerce & Economics, Matunga, Bombay. He was a cotton merchant and a businessman by profession. Role in the Indian Independence Movement Not much is known about Khimji’s involvement in the freedom struggle except that he was imprisoned for being a part of the Satyagraha and Quit India Movements. However, we know that he held important posts within the Congress Party and in local administration. Khimji was a member of the Bombay Municipal Corporation for ten years (1935-1945). Khimji was also a member of Bombay Legislative Assembly from 1937 until 1951. As a businessman, he actively engaged with organizations in various capacities. These included the Indian Merchants Chamber, Bombay Cotton Merchants, Muccadum Association and Bombay Port Trust. Contribution to Constitution Making Khimji was elected to the Assembly from Bombay through a Congress Party ticket. He did not speak during the Assembly debates. Later Contributions Khimji was elected to the First Lok Sabha from Bombay (1952-1957). He was a member of the All-India Congress Committee for over 15 years and the President of the District Congress Committee of Kutch. He continued to contribute to various organisations such as the East Indian Cotton Association Ltd. (1947-1950), Merchants Chamber, Bombay (1949) and the Indian Central Cotton Committee (1949-1956). He was also an office bearer for other educational trusts, medical aid trusts and relief committees. Resources Who’s who in India, Burma & Ceylon (Who’s Who Publishers (India) Limited, 1940) Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India)