1946 | B. R. Ambedkar on the Muslim League's Absence from the Constituent Assembly - Constitution of India Home ≫ Museum ≫ 1946 | B. R. Ambedkar on the Muslim League’s Absence from the Constituent Assembly 1946 | B. R. Ambedkar on the Muslim League’s Absence from the Constituent Assembly Date: December 17, 1946 Location: Constituent Assembly of India Audio Credits: Prasar Bharati Archives This audio clip features B.R. Ambedkar’s speech from 17 December 1946 in the Constituent Assembly, shedding light on a tumultuous period in India’s history when the Objectives Resolution was under discussion. His intervention was part of the Assembly’s deliberations on whether it was appropriate to pass the resolution in the absence of the Muslim League. The majority of the Constituent Assembly members were from the Congress or the Muslim League. However, their differences on the issue of Independent India’s federal structure would ultimately lead to the breakdown of the fragile compromise between the two parties and push the League to demand a separate nation-state. As a result, the League declared an official boycott of the Constituent Assembly on 22 November 1946. In this situation, the Assembly had to consider whether it was justified to pass the Objectives Resolution. By listening to this archival audio clip, you can understand Dr. Ambedkar’s stance on the issue. Suggested Reading This Month in Constitution-Making (November 1946): Was The Constituent Assembly Valid Despite Muslim League Absence? This Month in Constitution-Making (January 1947): The Constituent Assembly passes the Objectives Resolution More from the museum 1946 | Constituent Assembly Debates This 10 minute audio recording captures a part of the Constituent Assembly proceedings from 19 December 1946. The voices of Assembly members, Rajendra Prasad (Chairman), Frank Anthony, Jawaharlal Nehru, Kiran Shankar Roy, B.G.Kher and Syama Prasad Mookherjee are heard here. Audio Jawaharlal Nehru Introducing the Objectives Resolution in the Constituent Assembly December 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru addressing the Constituent Assembly while moving the Objectives Resolution. Photo Archive