Article 95: Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker - Constitution of India Part V Article 95 Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker (1) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the House of the People as the President may appoint for the purpose. (2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the House of the People the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by the House, shall act as Speaker. Version 1 Article 78, Draft Constitution 1948 (1) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker, or if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the House of the People as the President may appoint for the purpose. (2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the House of the People, the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by the House, shall act as Speaker. Version 2 Article 95, Constitution of India 1950 (1) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the House of the People as the President may appoint for the purpose. (2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the House of the People the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by the House, shall act as Speaker. Summary Draft Article 78 (Article 95) was discussed on 19 May 1949. It provided for the Deputy Speaker or any other member as to fill in Speaker’s role during his/her absence. There was no substantive debate around this Draft Article. The Assembly adopted it on 19 May 1949.