Nibaran Chandra Laskar - Constitution of India Home ≫ The Constitution Framers ≫ Nibaran Chandra Laskar Constituent Assembly Members Nibaran Chandra Laskar 1908 - 1987 Key Information Party: Indian National Congress Constituency: Assam Religion: Hindu Caste: Scheduled Caste Gender: Male Mother Tongue: Bangla Education: Postgraduate Committee Memberships None Biography Key Speeches Resources Biography Early Life Nibaran Chandra Laskar was born in February 1908 at Cachar district in Assam. He completed his schooling at Hailakandi H.E. School. Laskar went on to graduate with a masters in Sanskrit from Dhaka University (1931). He performed well in his academics and was ranked first at Dhaka University. Laskar was appointed as a Senior Professor of Sanskrit and Bengali at G.C. College in Silchar (1935-45). Laskar was an avid reader. He also enjoyed travelling and gardening. He was very interested in sports as well particularly Football, Cricket and Tennis. Role in Indian Independence Movement After resigning as a Senior Professor, Laskar was actively involved in the Indian freedom movement and joined the Indian National Congress. He began his political career as a member of the Silchar Municipal Board (1946-1949) and later took up various local administrative positions in Assam – President of Cachar Kalyan Samiti (1946-48) and General Secretary of Samaj Sanjivani Samiti in Cachar. Laskar participated in social reform movements as well. His focus was Dalit rights issues. He started various programs and campaigns to abolish untouchability and promote the welfare of backward classes. After the partition of Indian in 1947 he worked on rehabilitating refugees in Assam. Contribution to Constitution Making Laskar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from Assam on a Congress Party ticket. He spoke on reservation for Scheduled Castes in Parliament and State Legislatures. Contributions Post-Independence Laskar continued to play an important role in public life after independence. He was a member of the Assam Legislative Assembly (1947—52). He was then elected as a member of the First Lok Sabha (1952—57). He contributed to administration and governance both at the provincial and national level. He was a member of the All-India Cottage Industries Board (1949—52), Rehabilitation Finance Administration in Assam and Public Accounts Committee (1955—57). He also served as the Deputy Minister for Relief and Rehabilitation, in Assam (1951-52). This strong Dalit leader passed away on 25 June 1987. Key Speeches When the Assembly discussed reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Parliament, Laskar raised a concern that the Scheduled Castes in Assam would not have any representation due to the decrease in their population after partition. Resources Dalit Movement in India and Its Leaders (1857-1956) by Ramacandra Kshirasagara, (M.D. Publications, 1994).