Chaudhari Hyder Husein - Constitution of India Home ≫ The Constitution Framers ≫ Chaudhari Hyder Husein Constituent Assembly Members Chaudhari Hyder Husein 1890 - Key Information Party: Indian National Congress Constituency: United Provinces Religion: Muslim Caste: Non SC/ST Gender: Male Mother Tongue: Hindi Education: Postgraduate Committee Memberships None Biography Key Speeches Resources Biography Early Life Chaudhari Hyder Husein was born at Bhilwal in Barabanki district of Uttar Pradesh on 24 December 1890. He completed his schooling from Church Mission High School, Lucknow. He was highly educated and studied at various colleges including M.A.O. College, Aligarh; Oxford University and Trinity College, Dublin. He received an M.A. in art followed by a law degree. He studied at Lincoln’s Inn and was called to be a barrister in London. Later, he moved back to India, enrolled himself at the Allahabad High Court. From a video, about a house that Husein built, we know that he trained under Mirza Sami Ullah Beg Saheb and A.P. Sen. Husein, set up his practise in Lucknow and went on to become a Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court of India. Role in India’s Independence Movement Not much is known about Husein’s involvement in the freedom struggle except that he was a member of the U.P. Legislative Assembly in 1937. Contribution to Constitution Making Husein was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces through a Congress Party ticket. He did not actively participate in the Assembly debates. Husein made only one speech. Contributions Post-Independence Husein was elected as a member of the Provincial Parliament of Indian and later the Lok Sabha (1952-1957). He was a part of the Parliamentary delegation to Russia when he was a member of the First Lok Sabha. In the 1957 Lok Sabha elections, Husein lost to Atal Bihari Vajpayee. He then left active politics for a career in civil society that included the Indian Council of World Affairs, the Social Service League and the Samaj Sewa Sangh, Lucknow. He contributed to various charitable and educational institutions and founded the Rotary Club, Lucknow. Husein spent his time of leisure in agriculture related activities. Key Writings Husein published various articles that included ‘A unified Code for India’, ‘The Hindu Code’, ‘The Avadh Bar’, ‘Kashmir’ and ‘Lessons from the General Elections of 1951’. Key Speeches In his only speech in the Assembly, at the far end of constitution-making, Husein observed that the Constitution was flexible and compatible with a range of political ideologies. Resources Who’s Who, Lok Sabha Publication (1952) Evan – e – Hydar : Chaudhry Hyder Hussain Home – Magnificent Indian architecture from the 1930’s, Metaphor LitFest, YouTube