National Constitution Society Convention | IIHS, Bangalore | Session VI - Constitution of India Home ≫ Video ≫ National Constitution Society Convention | IIHS, Bangalore | Session VI Video National Constitution Society Convention | IIHS, Bangalore | Session VI November 23, 2018 In 2018, the Centre for Law and Policy Research, Bangalore (CLPR) initiated a network of Constitution societies in schools and colleges across India to be known as the National Constitution Society (NCS). Through its institutional chapters and a central Society, it looks to critically engage with India’s constitutional inheritance. In November 2018, CLPR organised a one-day All India National Constitution Society Convention that brought together student delegates from institutions across the country along with academics, lawyers and activists. This one-day event presented Student Delegates with the opportunity to critically engage with the history and contemporary relevance of the Indian Constitution and develop a plan to preserve, protect and promote constitutional values in the 21st century. Towards the end of the Convention, in its Plenary Session, the delegates elected the first Student Board Members for the NCS. This video covers Session VI of the event. Find the summary of the session below: Session VI: Organising a National Constitution Society: Structure and Agenda Vineeth Krishna, Centre for Law and Policy Research Kruthika R, Centre for Law and Policy Research Sudhir Krishnaswamy, Managing Trustee, Centre for Law and Policy Research; Professor, Azim Premji University CLPR Associate Vineeth K proposed an organisational structure for NCS. He emphasised that the society will be student led. He proposed that NCS be composed of a National Chapter and a series of Local Chapters based in colleges and universities across India. CLPR Associate Kruthika R presented a potential agenda for 2019 to the Student Delegates. She emphasised that CLPR can provide the Student Delegates with advice on how to run social media campaigns. Professor Sudhir Krishnaswamy emphasised to the delegates that NCS will be an independent student-led body, which will be supported by CLPR.