Article 189: Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum - Constitution of India Part VI Article 189 Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at any sitting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such. The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes. (2) A House of the Legislature of a State shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings. (3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, the quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be ten members or one-tenth of the total number of members of the House, whichever is greater. (4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum. Version 1 Article 164, Draft Constitution 1948 (1) Save as provided in this Constitution, all questions in a House or a joint sitting of two Houses of the Legislature of a State shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or Chairman or person acting as such. The Speaker or Chairman or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes. (2) A House of the Legislature of a State shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings. (3) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker or Chairman or person acting as such either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum. The quorum shall be ten members or one-sixth of the total number of members of the House, whichever is greater. Version 2 Article 189, Constitution of India 1950 (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at any sitting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such. The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes. ⁠(2) A House of the Legislature of a State shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings. ⁠(3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, the quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be ten members or one-tenth of the total number of members of the House, whichever is greater. ⁠(4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum. Summary Draft Article 164 (Article 189) was debated on 14 June 1949. It regulated the business of the State Legislature concerning voting, quorum and vacancies. Minor amendments were proposed to the language of the Draft Article by a member and the Chairman of the Drafting Committee. Both were accepted without debate. The amended Draft Article was adopted on 14 June 1949.