Article 198: Special procedure in respect of Money Bills - Constitution of India Part VI Article 198 Special procedure in respect of Money Bills (1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council. (2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations, and the Legislative Council shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative Assembly may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council. (3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council and accepted by the Legislative Assembly. (4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council. (5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned to the Legislative Assembly within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly. Version 1 Article 173, Draft Constitution 1948 1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council. (2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations, and the Legislative Council shall within a period of thirty days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative Assembly may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council. (3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council and accepted by the Legislative Assembly. (4) If the Legislative. Assembly does not accept any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council. (5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned to the Legislative Assembly within the said period of thirty days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly. Version 2 Article 198, Constitution of India 1950 (1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council. ⁠(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations, and the Legislative Council shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative Assembly may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council. ⁠(3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council and accepted by the Legislative Assembly. ⁠(4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council. ⁠(5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned to the Legislative Assembly within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly. Summary Draft Article 173 (Article 198) was debated on 10 June 1949. It prescribed a special procedure for the passage of Money Bills. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee proposed the amendment of clause (4), so that the Bill will be deemed to have been passed ‘by both Houses in the form in which it was passed‘. This amendment was accepted without debate. A member of the Drafting Committee wanted to reduce the time limit for the Legislative Council to review the Bill, from thirty days to twenty-one. Another member proposed that the limit should be decreased to fourteen days. He pointed out that a similar provision had been adopted for the Central Legislature. The Assembly accepted the fourteen-day time limit without debate. The amended Draft Article was adopted on 10 July 1949.