Lala Achint Ram - Constitution of India Home ≫ The Constitution Framers ≫ Lala Achint Ram Constituent Assembly Members Lala Achint Ram 1898 - 1961 Key Information Party: Indian National Congress Constituency: East Punjab Religion: Hindu Caste: Non SC/ST Gender: Male Mother Tongue: Education: Graduate Committee Memberships None Biography Resources Biography Early Life Lala Achint Ram was born at Amritsar in August 1898. He studied at the Government High Schools in Amritsar and Simla. Later, he pursued higher studies at the D.A.V. College in Lahore. He married Satyavati Devi, a freedom fighter in 1925 without accepting dowry and denouncing the purdah system. Role in Indian Independence Movement Ram joined the Indian independence at a young age and enrolled as a member of the Indian National Congress. He was involved in various movements and was imprisoned 4 times (1930-32, 1939, 1940 and 1942-45) including for his participation in the civil disobedience and Quit India movements. Ram, was also a key leader in the Servants of India Society established by Gopal Krishna Gokhale. Satyavati Devi was also arrested in 1942 with her three children. She mobilized prisoners and protested against the treatment given to political prisoners in Lahore jail. Her efforts were met with backlash and she was put in solitary confinement. However, her perseverance led to prison reform in Lahore jail. Ram held many administrative positions. He was a member of the Working Committee and General Secretary of the Punjab Congress. He was a Trustee for the Gulab Devi Tuberculosis Hospital at Lahore (till 1930). He also served as the President of the Punjab Harijan Sewak Sangh and was an executive member of the All-India Refugee Association. Contribution to Constitution Making Ram was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1946 from East Punjab on a Congress party ticket. He did not actively participate in the Assembly debates. Later Contributions Ram had an active political career post-independence. He was elected as a Member of Parliament in the first and second Lok Sabha from Hisar in present day Haryana (1952 and 57). Ram along with Satyavati Devi participated actively in Vinobha Bhave’s (a Gandhian leader) Bhoodan movement (a campaign to promote land re-distribution. Ram passed away during a campaign for land re-distribution in 1961. His son Krishna Kant, who joined him in various movements, went on to become India’s Vice-President (1997). Resources Who’s Who 1957 (Lok Sabha Secretariat, July 1957)