L.S. Bhatkar - Constitution of India Home ≫ The Constitution Framers ≫ L.S. Bhatkar Constituent Assembly Members L.S. Bhatkar 1901 - 1970 Key Information Party: Indian National Congress Constituency: Central Provinces and Berar Religion: Hindu Caste: Scheduled Caste Gender: Male Mother Tongue: Marathi Education: High school graduate Committee Memberships None Biography Resources Biography Early Life L.S. Bhatkar was born in the village of Thugaon, Amraoti (now Anravati), Maharashtra in 1901. He studied at the Neill City High School, Nagpur, and the Depressed Classes Mission High School, Bombay. Not much else is known about Bhaktar’s early life. That said, a source indicates that he enjoyed swimming and gardening. Role in India’s Independence Movement Bhatkar actively participated in India’s freedom struggle. He was imprisoned by the British for taking part in the Satyagraha Movement and later detained for his involvement in various other political movements. He campaigned against untouchability and worked for the empowerment of harijan and other backward communities. He was the Secretary of the Shri Chokhamela Hostel at Chikhli – a hostel established in 1921 for harijan students and a member of various social reform societies that engaged tackled caste discrimination. These included the Satyasodhak Samaj (Truth Seeker’s Society) and the Prarthana Samaj (Prayer Society). Bhaktar was a member of the District Council of Buldana for 18 years and the Berar Legislative Committee. He was elected as the Vice-President of the Municipal Committee of Chikhli (1933) and a member of the Central Provinces and Berar Legislative Assembly (1937-1942). Contribution to Constitution Making Bhatkar was elected to the Constituent Assembly from the Central Provinces and Berar through a Congress Party ticket. He was not an active participant in the Assembly. Later Contributions Bhatkar was a member of India’s Provincial Parliament, however, not much is known about his life after independence. Resources Who’s Who 1950 (Parliament of India)