Indian Independence Movement Archives - Constitution of India Tag: Indian Independence Movement Blog Our Independence Movement Constitution As we celebrate this 75th anniversary of Indian independence, let’s take a step back and ask ourselves: what exactly are we celebrating? When most of us celebrate Independence Day we think about the fact of independence—that we were liberated from British colonial rule and are not under the rule of any foreign land. We think […] Read more Blog Bhagat Singh Hanged, Karachi Resolution Passed In March 1931 thousands of Indians from across the country gathered at the Port city of Karachi. Among them were the leaders of India’s freedom movement, including Jawahar Lal Nehru, Sardar Patel, and Sarojini Naidu who were promptly garlanded and cheered on by a sea of Indians. The atmosphere was festive and energetic. The Indian […] Read more Blog Why India’s Constitution Framers Hated the Sedition Law On 11 June 2022, the Supreme Court permitted the Union to re-examine the constitutional validity of Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, which criminalizes sedition. 74 years ago, the Constituent Assembly examined the same law. Its position was clear: sedition law had no place in India’s constitutional and political future. The Draft Constitution […] Read more Blog This Month in Constitution-Making (February 1947): Britain Announces It Will Quit India On 20 February 1947, British Prime Minister C.R. Atlee made it official: Britain would leave India – and soon. Speaking in the House of Commons, Atlee informed members that Britain would transfer power to Indians – specifically to authorities established by a Constitution ‘approved by all parties’. Atlee acknowledged that as it stood, such a […] Read more Blog This Month in Constitution-Making (November 1946): Was The Constituent Assembly Valid Despite Muslim League Absence? In November 1946, key Indian political and legal figures were knee-deep in preparations for setting up the Constituent Assembly of India. The Muslim League was against the convening of the Assembly and signaled that it would not participate in the proceedings. On 22nd November, it officially announced a boycott. The Indian National Congress, which had […] Read more