Dr B. R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Morarji Desai Residential School, Gadag Wins State Finals! - Constitution of India Home ≫ Blog ≫ Dr B. R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Morarji Desai Residential School, Gadag Wins State Finals! Dr B. R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Morarji Desai Residential School, Gadag Wins State Finals! Blog Editorial Team 26 February 2024 Share On 25th February 2024, the Grand Finale (State Finals) of the Dr B. R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024 was successfully completed at Palace Grounds Bengaluru. The quiz was conducted in collaboration with CLPR’s Constitutionofindia.net team as the Knowledge partner, and was organised for Karnataka Residential Educational Institutions Society (KREIS) school students. Top two schools representing their districts from four zones participated neck-to-neck in this thrilling quiz about a diverse range of questions covering Indian Constitution making, history, geography, culture, among other topics. Victors of Zonal Rounds The first Zonal finals were held in Kalburgi on 15th February 2024. Students of Morarji Desai Residential Schools, Kalburgi, and Govt. Atal Bihari Vajpayee Residential School, Bidar won first and second places respectively. About 140 students from 8th, 9th, and 10th grades from Pratibhanvita Girls Residential School, Jagat, Kalaburagi, participated as audience. The Second zonal finals were held in Belagavi on 17th February 2024. Students of Morarji Desai Residential School, Benakankoppa, Naragund, Gadag and Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Kulageri, Bagalkote made their way to the finals as winners of first and second place in the zonal rounds. 100 students from 8th to 10th grades at Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, added to the competitive spirit of the quiz. On February 19th 2024, the third zonal round was held in Mysuru. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Ilavala, Mysuru took First Place, followed by Morarji Desai Residential School, Kallabettu, Moodbidri, Dakshin Kannada. 70 students belonging to 8th, 9th and 10th grades from Morarji Desai Residential School, Varakodu, Mysuru attended the quiz. The final zonal round was conducted in the state capital, namma Bengaluru. Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Solur, Ramanagara grabbed first place, followed by Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Kakanur, Davangere in second place. 80 students from 8th, 9th and 10th grades from Morarji Desai Residential School, Adakamaranahalli, Bengaluru Urban watched the quiz and encouraged participants! With a brilliant cohort of students from across the state, eight teams proceeded to the finals where their knowledge, critical and logical thinking and love for history, geography, culture and constitution making would be tested. The Finals On 25th February, Palace Grounds was brimming with over a 1,000 enthusiastic students from schools and colleges across the state. State finals quiz started off with a question on what Dr B.R. Ambedkar thought should be the basis of all executive and legislative Action. The team to which the question was directed to sharply and correctly answered that this was indeed the Directive Principles of State Policy! First Place was secured by Morarji Desai Residential School, Benakankoppa, Naragund, Gadag. Interestingly, this was also the team that answered all answers correctly in one of the buzzer rounds called connect where students have to find the common link between four or five text, audio, video or image components. Students sharply deduced the connection, in a display of quick thinking and team effort! Dr B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Kulageri, Bagalkote won second Place, followed by Dr B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Ilavala, Mysuru in third place! Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * Email * Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ