Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Ramanagara wins Bengaluru Zonals! - Constitution of India Home ≫ Blog ≫ Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Ramanagara wins Bengaluru Zonals! Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Ramanagara wins Bengaluru Zonals! Blog Editorial Team 22 February 2024 Share The Bengaluru Division Level Quiz was successfully conducted on 20th February 2024 as part of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024 for the students of KREIS Schools. The quiz was conducted in collaboration with CLPR’s Constitutionofindia.net team as the Knowledge partner, and was organised for Karnataka Residential Educational Institutions Society (KREIS) school students. Students from Ramnagara, Davangere, Tumakuru, Kolar, Chitradurga, Bengaluru Rural, Chikkaballapura, Shivamogga, Bengaluru Urban gathered at the Morarji Desai Residential School, Adakamaranahalli, Bengaluru Urban and participated in a challenging, engaging and exciting quiz! These were the teams which had secured the top score in the online round in their respective districts. Finalists Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Solur, Ramanagara grabbed first place, followed by Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Kakanur, Davangere in second place. Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Bhuvanahalli, Tumakuru won third place in the competition. About 80 students belonging to 8th, 9th and 10th grades from Morarji Desai Residential School, Adakamaranahalli, Bengaluru Urban watched the quiz as an audience, and also got the opportunity to participate in a fun audience quiz. Looking Ahead The top two teams, the Ramanagara and Davangere Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential Schools have reached the grand finale which will be held in Bengaluru on 25th February 2024. Stay tuned! Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * Email * Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ More blog posts Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Ilavala, Mysuru Wins Mysuru Zonals! 22 February 2024 • By Editorial Team Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Residential School, Ilavala, and Morarji Desai Residential School, Kallabettu, proceed to the Grand Finale of the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024. 1 mins Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School, Ramanagara wins Bengaluru Zonals! 22 February 2024 • By Editorial Team The top two teams, the Ramanagara and Davangere Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential Schools have reached the grand finale which will be held in Bengaluru on 25th February 2024. 1 mins