Privacy Policy - Constitution of India Privacy Policy Effective Date: 1 October 2020 ConstitutionofIndia.net aims to create public awareness and enable active public engagement with India’s constitutional tradition. Through our website ConstitutionofIndia.net (‘Website’), we provide digitized and fully searchable versions of 24 Historical Constitutions and 166 days of the Constituent Assembly’s deliberations, short introductions to the Constituent Assembly process, biographies of key Constituent Assembly members and summaries of Constituent Assembly Debates on key constitutional provisions. The privacy of our users is important to us. We encourage you to read this policy to understand how we collect, store, and use your data. 1. Scope This Privacy Policy applies to all users of our Website and attendees of conferences, meetings, and other events held by ConstitutionofIndia.net. 2. Consent By viewing or accessing any of the content on our Website, or signing up to attend any of our events, you consent to the collection, storage, and usage of your data as set out in this policy. 3. What Information Do We Gather? a. If you are visiting our Website, you will not be required to reveal your identity or any personal information. However, your activities on our website may be tracked – please see the section “Cookies” for more information. b. If you subscribe to our email updates, we will collect the following information: your first and last name, your email address, and your occupation. c. If you register for an event, either online or physical, conducted by ConstitutionofIndia.net, we will collect the same information as we do from subscribers, as well as your gender, mobile number, and any other information deemed relevant for the purposes of this event. 4. How Will We Use Your Information? a. We may use any information received from you for the purposes of sending you updates, or to contact you upon your own request and when otherwise necessary. This includes but is not limited to sharing information with you about events, new content, and any changes to our Website or this Privacy Policy. b. We may also use this information to audit and improve our Website content and outreach. In certain circumstances (for instance, when making a funding proposal), we may share aggregated non-personal information with third-parties. c. If, under any circumstances, we use a third-party to assist us in processing your information, we require that they comply with this Privacy Policy and take appropriate steps to preserve confidentiality and security. d. We may share your information with third parties in certain limited circumstances, such as to comply with legal instructions, prevention of fraud or imminent harm, or preserve the integrity of our network. e. If we propose to use your information for any purpose other than those outlined above, we will ensure that we notify you first. In this situation, you will have the opportunity to withhold or withdraw your consent for the use of your personal information. 5. Cookies a. Our Website utilizes cookies and other tracking technologies to collect information about your activity on the Website. We use these technologies to track trends and statistics about our Website, allowing us to make decisions about how to improve our look and content. b. Your browser will likely allow you to control whether or not allow cookies while using our Website. c. The information recorded by cookies/tracking technologies can include your IP address, duration of use of the Website, information about how you accessed the Website, click path, and other information about your geographic location. 6. Confidentiality and Security a. Any information that you share with us will be kept confidential and protected unless disclosure of the same is required or permitted by law. b. If you do share any information with us, we will endeavour to follow industry-standard best practices in protecting it. All information will be securely stored within password-protected databases that can only be accessed by authorized personnel. However, as no method of electronic storage or transmission can guarantee 100% security, we cannot guarantee the absolute security of this information. c. Only employees, agents, or consultants of ConstitutionofIndia.net who require access to this information in order to fulfil their professional duties, will have the right to use and access this information. d. Your information may be shared with third-party service providers to enhance the services we provide to you – such as sharing content and updates via email. In this case, we will take reasonable measures to protect your information by entering into confidentiality agreements or other arrangements with these third-parties. e. We will not sell or use your information for commercial gain without your consent. 7. Third-Party Websites ConstitutionofIndia.net hyperlinks to a number of third-party sites, to ensure that users can verify the information on the Website. If you click on a link to a third-party site or otherwise leave our Website, we cannot accept any responsibility for the collection, storage, or use of your information by such third parties as a result of your visits or usage of that website. Instead, the collection, storage and use of the information will be governed by the privacy policy of that website. Please ensure that you go through the privacy policy of any third-party site linked to our Website, before providing any of your information. 8. Accuracy We want to maintain accurate and current information of all our users and subscribers. If you need to update or correct any information that you have already shared with us, please contact us on cadindia@clpr.org.in and we will incorporate these changes as soon as practicable. If you want to obtain the information we currently hold on you, please email cadindia@clpr.org.in and we will aim to share this information with you within fourteen (14) days of receipt of your email. 9. Amendments If we update any aspects of this Privacy Policy, we will take every reasonable step to bring these changes to your attention by posting all changes prominently on our Website for a reasonable period of time. We may also use your information to contact you to notify you about any changes. 10. Disputes a. Your use of this Website, and any disputes relating to privacy and personal information, are subject to this Privacy Policy. This Policy will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Republic of India. b. Further, it is irrevocably and unconditionally agreed that the courts of Bengaluru, India shall have exclusive jurisdiction to entertain any proceedings in relation to any disputes arising out of the same. In accordance with the Information Technology Act 2000, the name and the details of the Grievance Officer at ConstitutionofIndia.net is provided below. Vineeth Krishna Centre for Law and Policy Research Email: vineeth.krishna@clpr.org.in