Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: MDRS, Kalaburagi Victorious in Inaugural Zonal Finals - Constitution of India Home ≫ Blog ≫ Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: MDRS, Kalaburagi Victorious in Inaugural Zonal Finals Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024: MDRS, Kalaburagi Victorious in Inaugural Zonal Finals Blog Editorial Team 20 February 2024 Share The KREIS edition of ConQuest in 2023, featured the regular grand finale of ConQuest along with a special Karnataka Residential Educational Institutions Society (KREIS). This edition involved preliminary and on-stage finals for students from KREIS government schools. Now, the Constitutiofindia.net team at CLPR is thrilled to announce our renewed collaboration with the Social Welfare Department, Government of Karnataka! CLPR will serve as the knowledge partner for the Ambedkar Constitution Quiz, organized for all KREIS schools across Karnataka by the KRESI and Social Welfare Department, GOK. We at Constitutiofindia.net are thrilled for the opportunity to extend our constitutional education resources to a broader group of school students! Unlike ConQuest, the questions in various rounds of this quiz and does not exclusively focus on the Constitution, although it remains the primary focus. Students engage with a diverse range of questions covering Indian history, geography, culture, and various other topics. The Quiz kicked off with a preliminary round, where teams from 833 KREIS schools participated in an online quiz. The top-performing teams from this round advanced to their respective zonal rounds, competing against other district finalists in their zones. The first of these zonal finals took place on February 15, 2024, featuring teams from KREIS schools in Ballari, Bidar, Kalaburagi, Koppal, Raichur, Vijayanagara, and Yadgiri districts. The zonal finals in Kalaburgi were closely contested, concluding with a question closer to home. Students were shown a picture of a large gathering in front of Vidhana Soudha, Bangalore, which occurred on September 15, 2023–the International Day of Democracy–and made its way into the Guinness Book of World Records. This event involved the mass reading of the preamble by 10,000 people! In the end, the winners of the first zonal round of the Ambedkar Constitution Quiz 2024 were Morarji Desai Residential Schools, Kalburgi (1st place), and Govt. Atal Bihari Vajpayee Residential School, Bidar (2nd place). The second runners-up were MDRS School in Koppal. The first two teams have secured their spots in the State Grand Finale, scheduled for February 24, 2024. About 140 students from 8th, 9th, and 10th grades from Pratibhanvita Girls Residential School, Jagat, Kalaburagi, participated as audience in this quiz and enthusiastically engaged with the audience rounds! Stay tuned for the Belagavi zonal finals! Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * Email * Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ