R.V. Dhulekar - Constitution of India Home ≫ The Constitution Framers ≫ R.V. Dhulekar Constituent Assembly Members R.V. Dhulekar 1891 - 1980 Key Information Party: Indian National Congress Constituency: United Provinces Religion: Hindu Caste: Non SC/ST Gender: Male Mother Tongue: Hindi Education: Postgraduate Committee Memberships None Biography Key Speeches Biography Early Life: Raghunath Vinayak Dhulekar was born on 6th January 1891 in Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh. He completed his graduation in English from Presidency College, Calcutta and further studies from Government College, Patna. After finishing his Bachelors of Law from University Law College, Allahabad he set up his practice at Jhansi District Court. In the year 1912, he married Shrimati Jankibai. Dhulekar played a significant role in India’s Independent Movement. He was a member of the Provincial Health Board (United Provinces) and Board of Sanskrit Studies (United Provinces). He was appointed as the Chairman of Jhansi Municipality and Board of Indian Medicine (United Provinces). Dhulekar was also assigned the position of Convener of Finance Committee, Government of United Provinces. Role in India’s Independence Movement: Dhulekar took active part in India’s National Movement & the Salt March. He underwent various terms of imprisonment and house arrests for participating in several independence movements. In 1921 he gave up his law practice and actively joined the Non Cooperation Movement. Between 1924-1928, he worked towards removal of untouchability and was the founding member of several educational institutions. He was also the founding president of Jhansi Ayurvedic University and Bundelkhand Ayurvedic College, Jhansi. Dhulekar held many significant positions in Indian politics including Member of the Legislative Assembly (United Provinces) between 1936 to 1940. He was a member of U.P.C.C. and A.I.C.C. on several occasions. He was also appointed as the Secretary of U.P.P.C.C. between 1921 – 1924. He held the position as the Chairman of Reception Committee, Provincial Political Conference of Congress, 1928. Contribution to Constitution Making: R. V. Dhulekar was appointed to the Constituent Assembly from the United Provinces on a Congress Party ticket. He made important interventions in the debates regarding the prohibition of cow slaughter and Hindi as the official language of Independent India, arguing against separate electorates & reservations of seats as ‘minorities have nothing to fear’ in the Independent India. Later Contributions: Dhulekar was a Member of the Parliament between 1952-1957 from the Constituency of Jhansi District, South Uttar Pradesh. He was also elected as the Chairman of Uttar Pradesh Legislative Council, Lucknow between 1958-64. He passed away on 1st January 1980. Key Writings: Dhulekar had a few publications under his name: Dominion Status vs. Independence in English, Council Sudhar in Hindi, and the Hindi Year Book from 1929 to 1942. Key Speeches Dhulekar was a strong proponent of making Hindi the official language of India. He was strongly against using any other language, and moved an amendment stating that the Procedure Committee should make all the rules in Hindi with a translation in English and the Hindi version should be considered as the authentic one. He stated that prohibition on cow slaughter/cow protection should be included in the Fundamental Rights.