Thakur Das Bhargava - Constitution of India Home ≫ The Constitution Framers ≫ Thakur Das Bhargava Constituent Assembly Members Thakur Das Bhargava 1886 - 1962 Key Information Party: Indian National Congress Constituency: East Punjab Religion: Hindu Caste: Non SC/ST Gender: Male Mother Tongue: Hindi Education: Postgraduate Committee Memberships None Biography Key Speeches Resources Biography Early Life Thakur Das Bhargava was born in Rewari, Gungoan District on 15 November 1886. He was educated at Law College, Lahore and Presidency College, Calcutta. Soon after, he began practicing law in Hissar, East Punjab. In 1926, he became a member of the Central Legislative Assembly. He quickly became active in national politics and was one of the members of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Delegation to England in 1948. He also chaired the Jail Reforms Committee for East Punjab and was a member of the Advisory Committees on Defence and Finance for the Government of India. Role in India’s Independence Movement Bhargava joined the independence movement in 1920 through the Congress party. At the same time, he engaged in social welfare movements and co-founded the Vidya Pracharni Sabha, which opened 65 schools in rural Hissar. Contribution to Constitution Making Bhargava was elected to the Constituent Assembly on a Congress ticket from East Punjab. He intervened in the debates on cow slaughter, the Preamble, and the role of the Vice President. Later Contributions From 1957-1962, Bhargava served as a Member of Parliament in the Lok Sabha. He passed away on 13th December 1962. Key Speeches In the debates on the role of the Vice President, Bhargava argued that their responsibilities should be clearly defined, particularly in a situation where the President was impeached. Lamenting that India had to export so much food, he advocated strongly for the ban on cow slaughter, arguing that cows were essential for the improvement of India’s agricultural capabilities. Resources Thakur Das Bhargava stays alive in minds and hearts of admirers by Manvir Saini (The Times of India, 2019)