P. S. Deshmukh - Constitution of India Home ≫ The Constitution Framers ≫ P. S. Deshmukh Constituent Assembly Members P. S. Deshmukh 1898 - 1965 Key Information Party: Indian National Congress Constituency: Central Provinces and Berar Religion: Hindu Caste: Non SC/ST Gender: Male Mother Tongue: Marathi Education: Postgraduate Committee Memberships None Biography Key Speeches Biography Early Life Dr Punjabrao S Deshmukh, also known as Babusaheb Deshmukh was born on 27 December 1898. Born and raised in Amravati, Maharashtra, he obtained his early education in Papal and Amravati. Later, he went on to study in Fergusson College, Poona, Edinburgh University, Oxford University and Lincoln’s Inn, London. Role in India’s Independence Movement Deshmukh was a farmers’ rights activist and set up the C. P. & Berar Farmers’ Association. He participated in Satyagraha to protest against untouchability in Amba Temple, Amravati. Further, he set up Shivaji Education Society. Contribution to Constitution Making Deshmukh was elected from Central Provinces & Berar. He spoke frequently in the Constituent Assembly and intervened in debates around citizenship and federalism. Later Contributions Deshmukh was the Union Minister of Agriculture in the first cabinet post-independence. He was elected to the Lok Sabha for two terms between 1952 and 1962. During his stint as a Parliamentarian, he held the portfolios of Union Minister of Agriculture and Union Minister of Cooperation. He continued his advocacy work around agriculture and farmers’ rights, and represented India at international organizations, conferences and delegations including F.A.O. Conference and Far East Regional Conferences. Deshmukh passed away in 1965. Key Speeches 1. During the debate around citizenship provisions, he proposed the insertion of a residuary clause which would provide Hindus and Sikhs, irrespective of residence, Indian citizenship. 2. Deshmukh argued for moving the item of food adulteration from the State List to the Concurrent List.