Article 157: Qualifications for appointment as Governor - Constitution of India Part VI Article 157 Qualifications for appointment as Governor No person shall be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has completed the age of thirty-five years. Version 1 Article 134, Draft Constitution of India 1948 (1) No person shall be eligible for election as Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has completed the age of thirty-five years. (2) A person shall not be eligible for election as a Governor of a State- (a) If he is disqualified for being chosen as a member of the Legislative Assembly of the State: Provided that it shall not be necessary for any such person to be a resident of the State; or (b) If he holds any office or position of emolument under the Government of India or the Government of any State for the time being specified in the First Schedule, or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments. Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause a person shall not be deemed to hold any office or position of emolument by reason only that- Alternatively (1) No person shall be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has completed the age of thirty-five years. (2) A person shall not be eligible for appointment as Governor of a State if he is disqualified for being chosen as a member of the Legislative Assembly of the State: Provided that it shall not be necessary for any such person to be a resident of the State. Version 2 Article 157, Constitution of India 1950 No person shall be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has completed the age of thirty-five years. Summary Draft Article 134 (Article 157) was debated on 31st May 1949. It contained two options relating to the eligibility criteria for the position of Governor. The debates in the Assembly were confined to the second alternative. The Chairman of the Drafting Committee moved to wholly replace the Draft Article, so that the two conditions for appointment were (1) citizenship of India, and (2) aged at least 35 years. The amendment was accepted without debate. The amended Draft Article was adopted on 31st May 1949.