Article 68: Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy - Constitution of India Part V Article 68 Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy (1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiration of the term. (2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 67, be entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. Version 1 Article 55 (5) to (6), Draft Constitution of India 1948 (5) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiration of the term. (6) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person elected to fill such vacancy shall be entitled to hold office for the full term of five years as provided in article 56 of this Constitution. Version 2 Article 68, Constitution of India 1950 (1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiration of the term. ⁠(2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 67, be entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. Summary The Draft Article was debated on 28th and 29th December 1948 and 13th October 1949. It regulated the vacancy of the Vice-President’s office. There was no debate on the Draft Article 55 (5) to (6). All the discussions were related to Draft Article 55 (1) to (4). During later stages, the Drafting Committee decided to have a separate article that dealt with the vacancy of the Vice-President’s office. The Draft Article was adopted along with Draft Article 55 (1) to (4).