Constitution Making Archives - Constitution of India Tag: Constitution Making Blog This Month in Constitution Making (September 1945): Newly-elected Labour Party announces a Constituent Assembly for India The 1945 UK General Election was significant: it came right after World War II. British voters had the chance to shape the post-war future of their war-fatigued country. The two main political parties in contention were the Conservative Party, running on their leadership of the successful war effort, and the Labour Party, which was offering […] Read more Blog The Making of India’s Constitution: 5 Essential Primary Sources In recent years, there has been an explosion of interest in the founding of India’s constitutional democracy. A number of books, podcasts, videos and essays have engaged with the origins of India’s Constitution. This a welcome development and we hope that this continues to deepen and grow. That said, at ConstitutionofIndia.net, we believe that there […] Read more Blog Chileans Overwhelmingly Reject a New Progressive Constitution This week, Chileans emphatically shot down a new Constitution. 62% out of the 13 million Chileans who voted in a referendum, rejected the Constitution drafted by a Chilean Constitutional Convention. Although the defeat was predicted by opinion polls leading upto the vote, the startling margin of defeat was not. The new Constitution was envisioned to […] Read more Blog 5 Essential Writings on Constitution Making On 4 September 2022, around 13 million Chileans voted to reject what many consider as the most progressive Constitution ever written. This new Constitution was drafted by a 155-strong Constituent Assembly which was charged to replace the old 1980 Constitution imposed by the military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet. The Chilean constitution-making process and its failure […] Read more Blog Desk Brief: Did Indians Participate in Constitution Making? The Constituent Assembly publicly circulated the Draft Constitution 1948 and received feedback and comments. We know this from Shiva Rao’s six-volume The Framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents which contains constitutional proposals from ministries, lawyer groups, and some trade union associations. However, our understanding of the scale and nature of this public engagement is rather […] Read more